// Africa.

[Politics of Africa: Fiction & Film].

In this course, we will take a look at the politics of Africa through 
the lens of fiction and film. Our discussions will focus on the 
transformative historical and political moments that have shaped the 
African continent over the course of the last two centuries. We will 
begin by reading Joseph Conrad’s Heart of Darkness, a fictional 
narrative written in the heydays of European colonialism, as a means 
to understand the profound and inescapable effects of colonization. 
We will also explore fictional accounts of Apartheid in South Africa, 
the Mau Mau Rebellion in Kenya, and the Biafran War in Nigeria, among 
others, in order to understand the close and inextricable links 
between literature and politics in Africa. The enormous impact of 
iconic political figures such as Nelson Mandela and Seretse Khama on 
fiction and film will also be considered.

[Africa is People].

What is Africa to you? How should Africa be written? How should Africa 
not be written? These fundamental questions are among other crucial 
questions informing the direction of this class, where the world’s 
second largest continent, Africa—humankind’s cradle—will be at the 
center of our discussions. We will contend with the historical 
representations of Africa, its peoples, societies and cultures, and 
what it means to imagine Africa in the contemporary moment. In doing 
so, we will not just leave at the representation of Africa as a 
geographic tragedy but as a complex space that has long teemed with 
a “human vibrancy” that enabled the peopling of the world.

[Intra-Africa Cooperation].

There has been a recent resurgence in inter-state cooperation in 
Africa on security and economic issues. These developments have 
brought a new focus to regional economic communities as well as 
continent-wide organizations like the African Union and the African 
Development Bank. This raises two important questions: (1) what 
explains the observed patterns of inter-state cooperation on security, 
trade, and investment in Africa? ; and (2) under what conditions has 
inter-state cooperation yielded results in the attempt to provide 
“African solutions to African problems?” This class will examine how 
the need to cooperate on security and economic matters is driving 
inter-state cooperation in Africa. The goal of the class is to 
systematically interrogate the logic of inter-state cooperation in 
the region, and the workings of key sub-regional and continental 
organizations. Terrorist organizations like al-Shabaab, AQIM, and 
Boko Haram, as well as ongoing civil conflict in a number of countries, 
present new challenges to African states, and have forced them to seek 
regional approaches to deal with the emerging security threats. Why do 
some African states seek international assistance in the face of 
security threats while others do not? And what is the impact of 
regional organizations on state development in Africa? At the same 
time, Africa has over a dozen regional economic communities, with 
each country being a member of at least two. Yet at 12%, intra-Africa 
trade is among the lowest of any region in the word. If Africa’s 
borders are artificial, why are they so impervious to trade? How has 
regional economic cooperation impacted intra-Africa trade and general 
mobility of goods, services, and people? The class will pay special 
attention to ongoing interstate infrastructure projects under the 
NEPAD initiative; as well as the main political and economic 
communities such as the African Union, ECOWAS, the EAC, SADC, and 
COMESA.

[Economics of Africa].

This course is not open to first year undergraduate students. 
This course is concerned with the understanding and analysis of 
African Economies. We will explore many of the issues that African 
economies are grappling with today in their progress to eliminate 
poverty and improve the livelihoods of millions. Specifically, we 
will examine questions such as, what is the structure of African 
economies, what are the key sectors and what are the challenges and 
opportunities therein? What is Africa’s role in the global economy? 
The course will be structured in three core parts: The first part is 
an overview to understand African economies, the second part covers, 
more in-depth, seven key topics that matter for the viability and the 
performance of African economies, and the third part of the course 
will take an international perspective to analyze the role of Africa 
in the world economy, discussing issues on trade and foreign aid. 
After taking this course, students are expected to have a good 
understanding of the current opportunities and challenges faced by 
African economies, to understand where Africa stands and how Africa 
contributes to the world economy, and to be able to have intelligent 
conversations on a wide range of socio-economic topics on the African 
continent. We cover material ranging from qualitative case studies to 
theories of growth and trade and to statistical analyses. No prior 
exposure to any of these fields is required—the material is designed 
to be accessible to all, and technical material is presented in a 
relatively non-technical fashion.

[The Racial Life of Waste].

Africa will constitute the backdrop for discussing the markings and 
un-markings of waste and its disproportionate effects on Africans and 
African-descended peoples in The Racial Life of Waste. In particular, 
we will focus on how the racialization of the African body at the 
“inauguration of modernity” drew both on metaphorical and literal 
readings of waste. For instance, notions like pungence, impurity, 
darkness, dirt, emptiness, etc., commonly associated with the African 
body, situated the African outside the parameters of the “Human” 
(Wynter 2003). Descriptions of Africa as “the dark continent” 
(Stanley 1878), “the heart of darkness” (Conrad, 1899), “a place 
without history” (Trevor-Roper 1963), “the Whiteman’s grave” 
(Curtin 1963), to name a few negations (Achebe 1977), created the 
conditions that racialized the African qua Black body as waste. In 
the contemporary moment, these negations, which also imagined Africa 
as an empty continent, a “terra nullius” or “terra incognita” 
(Mudimbe 1987) have spilled over into the recent interplanetary 
obsession among billionaires like Elon Musk, Jeff Bezos, Bill Gates, 
etc., to discharge “waste” into space because space is empty. If the 
African experiment is the foundation on which these extra-terrestrial 
projects on waste deposition are envisioned, we will discuss how the 
appearance of the “modern human” in the western imaginary coincided 
with the construct of “waste.” In the era of the European encounter, 
the incorporation of both the African human and the African continent 
into Western definitions of the human resulted in their equation or 
reduction to Waste. Hence, we will distinguish between “waste 
produced by humans” and “humans produced as waste,” a distinction 
that will show us that human-produced waste, otherwise known as 
“anthropogenic waste,” is not produced equally around the globe. 
For example, between 2000 to 2020, Africa, compared to the rest of 
the world, contributed only 3.9 percent of carbon emissions (Kamer 
2022), making it the least polluting continent yet the most 
vulnerable paradoxically. These are the key questions we will 
consider: What intersections between race, class, gender, and 
history are at play in the production of waste? How does Africa, in 
general, and the African body in particular, embody the paradox of 
extraction and deposition? In a world where Africa is figured as a 
geographical “shithole,” how significant are these considerations in 
the pursuit of radical global environmental justice?

[Terrorism & Insurgency in Africa].

The words “terrorism” and “insurgency” have long dominated the 
headlines about Africa. Too often, “Africa” is ascribed by the media 
and popular culture as being a violent continent where conflict is an 
inevitable outcome of primordial and ancient hatreds. But how much do 
we really know about political violence in Africa? We will 
interrogate this question by probing: Who defines “terrorism” and 
“insurgency” in Africa? Why do armed groups form and what drives 
individuals to join them? Why does political violence manifest in 
different ways? Are terrorism and insurgency effective political 
tactics? Are current forms of political violence inventions from the 
modern era, or do they have deeper historical roots? This course will 
address these and other questions, while introducing students to 
relevant analytical frameworks, theories, and cases concerning 
terrorism, insurgency, and related forms of political violence in 
Africa. The first part of the course will examine the broad 
historical trends, as well as theoretical, conceptual, and empirical 
literature surrounding terrorism and insurgency as political violence 
in Africa. We will use the tools and knowledge gained in the first 
part of the course to situate and interrogate case studies in the 
second part of the course.

[Reimagining Tech in Africa].

The course will survey the development of the Sub-Saharan African 
economies since independence. The focus will be on economic 
development, but aims to place the subject in its broader political, 
social and cultural context. The approach will be historical: 
starting with a brief review of the colonial inheritance, then 
covering the largely optimistic period to the early 1970s, moving on 
to the problems and stagnation of the 1980s, followed by the slow 
recovery of the 1990s which has accelerated in the first half of this 
decade. The survey will conclude by looking at where Africa is today 
and the prospects going forward. The course will explore key issues 
and themes that marked each period and try to piece together an 
overall story concerning where African economies have been and where 
they are going.

[Reimagining African technology markets].

Technology plays an increasingly important role in Africa’s development 
and social and economic progress. Africa’s digital revolution can be 
attributed to demand from a youthful population, increased 
digitization and digital transformation and increased investment in 
innovative products. That said, there are pervasive challenges such 
as poor critical infrastructure, a wide digital divide and skills 
gaps. While the tech sector has positioned itself to help solve 
Africa’s challenges, there is inconclusive evidence on the 
sustainability of such corporate social impact and the sector’s role 
in solving systemic challenges. As such, the class will examine the 
market systems approach to development and how to leverage the 
corporate sector for good. Africa’s fast adoption of technology for 
development provides a shift from typical “brick and motor” business 
models that focused on the construction of dated infrastructure and 
the distribution of goods, to one that leapfrogs and focuses on 
leaning in to the Fourth Industrial Revolution, a rising gig economy, 
increasing local manufacturing thus providing Africans with additional 
agency to craft their own progress. This course will introduce broad 
topics related to Africa’s development at the intersection of business, 
development and technology. Students will study factors relevant to the 
tech sector’s success such as geopolitical influences such as China’s 
digital belt road, cyber and information technology security, ethical 
considerations in product development and evolving legal frameworks. 
We will discuss the role of the private sector as a vehicle for change 
with a particular emphasis on how technological innovation is affecting 
the lives and livelihoods of Africans and African markets. The course 
will involve deep engagement with classmates, guest speakers, and 
readings and real-life focused assignments that allow students 
challenge, design and reimagine tech in Africa.

[PubPolDynamicsAfrica Env Crime].

This interactive course examines the impacts of environmental crime, 
such as illegal logging and wildlife trafficking, in Africa and the 
public and private sector response to quell this dangerous trend. 
Recognized as one of the most lucrative forms of transnational 
criminal activity, environmental crime in Africa is worth tens of 
billions dollars annually and comparable to drug and human 
trafficking in terms of profitability. This illicit trade not only 
causes severe environmental degradation, but it adversely impacts 
national security and governance throughout the continent. This 
course analyzes current bilateral and multilateral policy 
prescriptions to address environmental crime and examines private 
sectors solutions currently in place to counter illegal fishing, 
illegal logging, and illicit wildlife trafficking. A portion of the 
course will be dedicated to case studies of specific African source 
countries and their relationship with demand countries in Asia. 
Senior-level policy makers, field based conservationists, and private 
sector leaders, will join certain classes to explain how they view 
this issue set and how these principles are practically applied.

