// Asia.

[ChineseAppr:Sci, State, Strat].

Engaging China cannot be limited to a singular perspective. The 
complexity of interactions between the United States and China for 
over more than 100 years requires a more in depth analysis. With 
this course, students explore American as well as Chinese perspectives 
on the governance of China, religious freedom, human rights and 
differing strategies of political and military engagement. As a 
starting point for exploring the different principles of Western and 
traditional Chinese approaches, the course highlights scientific 
principles of Western and Traditional Chinese Medicine. This offers 
insights into different approaches to public healthcare, managing 
well-being and the treatment of illnesses. This course is designed 
for students who look for an opportunity to develop nuanced 
comparative insights into Chinese American relations, in order to 
maximize access and understanding of different and fascinating 
systems of organizing society, science and international relations.

[Sovereign Risk and Asia].

Sovereign risk is the risk that a national government will default 
on its debt obligations. For most of the post-World War II era, 
sovereign risk was mainly a concern facing creditors to emerging 
market governments. However, in the wake of the global financial 
crisis in 2008, in some advanced countries government debt has grown 
to levels only previously seen in wartime while the ongoing Covid 
pandemic is pushing sovereign debt even higher to historical levels, 
a trend that has undermined the creditworthiness of governments 
formerly judged to be of the lowest risk. This course takes the 
position that deficits and debt matter, although students are welcome 
to challenge that view. It will provide a multifaceted view of 
sovereign risk, primarily through the lens of credit rating agency 
methodologies. It will examine the interplay of economic, 
institutional, fiscal, financial market and geopolitical factors that 
influence sovereign credit quality. It will focus on sovereign case 
studies and examine common features of debt crises—namely, the 1980s 
Latin America debt crisis which engulfed the Philippines, the 1997 
Asian Financial Crisis and the effect of the 2008 Global Financial 
Crisis on Asian sovereigns. While the focus is on Asia, the course 
will examine the watershed Greek default and debt crisis of 2009-2018 
and a contentious triple-A downgrade of the U.S. government in 2011. 
The course will also examine the recent rise of China as a major 
creditor to developing countries as well as the fiscal and economic 
effects of the Covid pandemic on the creditworthiness of advanced and 
developing countries. The final project for the course will be 
in-class oral presentations in the format of a mock sovereign credit 
rating committee. At the conclusion of the course, students will: 
(1) develop an understanding of the evolution of sovereign risk since 
the 1980s and rise of global bond markets, (2) be conversant on the 
interplay of factors influencing sovereign credit risk (3) be capable 
of taking a substantive opinion of relative sovereign credit quality. 
Grading consists of weekly, short writing assignments and the final 
project; class participation will be a key factor. This semester, the 
course will feature one guest lecturer, the head of Moody’s Investors 
Service Macro-Board and former director of their sovereign default 
analysis work. The instructor will draw on his experience gained over 
three decades, including as the Asia-Pacific and Middle East regional 
manager for Moody’s Investors Service in Singapore and as an emerging 
market economist at the Institute of International Finance in 
Washington, DC. He is currently the president and CEO of The Korea 
Society in New York City and he also teaches at Columbia University’s 
graduate School of International and Public Affairs.

[Trade, Trust & Development: SAsia].

As the world’s economic center of gravity increasingly pivots to 
Asia, and as South Asia gradually enhances its role in the world 
economy, an economic understanding of the region becomes increasingly 
more important. This is a course about the evolution of South Asian 
countries, home to around 1.9 billion people, their contrasting 
development stories and paradigms, the economic and human 
interlinkages between them, and the vast untapped potential of 
those interlinkages. It is about the significant foregone 
development opportunities arising from insufficient regional 
engagement, that affect most countries in South Asia, including the 
three largest countries. As a region, most of South Asia was a part 
of successive empires, making cultural and economic interaction 
between countries a very natural phenomenon. After the Partition of 
1947, and successive events thereafter, the region has contrived to 
create barriers to deeper engagement. This is not a course about 
India alone, nor about India-Pakistan. It is about South Asia.

[Asia's Nationalism].

Nationalism has become a widely used concept in political science, 
and yet there is no consensus on its definition. For some, it 
reflects simply a frame for human identity, a notional nation to 
call home. For others, nationalism represents the mobilization of 
individuals around the cause of the nation, and can have a far 
bolder intention. In today’s global politics, nationalism is often 
seen as a reaction to, and hindrance of a globalizing world. In some 
instances, nationalism is seen as globalism’s antidote, while in 
other instances it reflects a desire to repel or resist the 
transformative impact of a world increasingly intruding into 
national communities. In Asia, this concept has had many 
incarnations. Largely associated with the arrival of Western 
imperialism, the nation-state seemed an imposter in Asia especially 
to those who had been educated in the West but who sought to give 
voice to their culture’s identity. From the early decades of the 
twentieth century, Asia’s leaders – its scholars, its politicians 
and its military commanders – have deliberated on this concept of 
the nation and of their nation’s identity in the world. Nationalism 
in the early twenty-first century Asia seems to be organized around 
the conflict that redrew the boundaries of Asian societies, and the 
balance of power that it fostered in its wake. History, and its 
reimagining, provides ample fodder for Asia’s contemporary 
nationalist impulses. This course will explore the various episodes 
and advocates of nationalism in Asia. Beginning with some of the 
early reactions on this modern concept of the nation and whether it 
suited their own societies, we will explore the evolution and 
reframing of nationalism across Asia.

[Encountering Asia: Pol/Eco/Soc].

Asia will be a part of your life. The region's economic growth has 
never been more deeply felt across the globe, while its strategic 
importance and political influence impact the international system 
profoundly. Home to almost half of the world's population, source of 
much of the world's consumer goods, and place where some of the 
world's most ancient and enduring civilizations emerged, Asia is an 
indispensible topic of investigation for all students of 
international affairs. This course provides an introduction to 
Modern Asia. Attention will be paid to how the history, politics, 
and economics of this vast region impact policy challenges for the 
U.S. and Asia today. No prior knowledge of Asia will be assumed, and 
students can come from any academic field. While politics is 
important to understanding Asia, the course will draw insights from 
many other fields, including philosophy, social and political 
sciences, pop culture, health, science and education. The instructor, 
an award-winning author, former White House official, and cable news 
analyst, will employ classic and contemporary readings, multimedia, 
music, and guest speakers to create an interactive classroom 
experience.

[US-SE Asian Rel: Post 9/11 Wrld].

This seminar course will examine the relationship between the United 
States and Southeast Asia in the aftermath of the September 11, 2001 
terrorist bombings. These bombings led the United States to pay more 
attention to Southeast Asia due to the links between several 
militant Islamic groups in the region and the Al Qaeda network. 
Since 2013, the terrorist threat has increased with the rise of the 
Islamic State (IS), which remains a threat even though it has lost 
much territory. The course will cover U.S. relations on the political, 
economic, and socio-cultural levels with the eleven countries of 
Southeast Asia: Brunei, Burma (Myanmar), Cambodia, East Timor, 
Indonesia, Laos Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore, Thailand, and 
Vietnam. The United States is especially concerned about Indonesia, 
the largest Muslim nation in the world.

[Japan's Search for Strategy].

This course will examine the search for security, prosperity and 
identity in modern Japan. The course opens with an introduction to 
the enduring elements of Japan’s Strategic Culture. In the second 
session the course introduces the Yoshida Doctrine of anti-communism, 
pro-business economic policies, alignment with the United States and 
passive security policy that guided Japan’s international 
orientation throughout the Cold War. The next three classes explore 
the post-Cold War transformation of Japan’s domestic political 
economy as well as legacy issues from the “1955 System” and the 
Second World War that have shaped the strategic debate. The second 
half of the class then turns outward to explore the dynamics of 
Japan’s contemporary relations with the United States and the other 
powers in Asia. The final class returns to the question of Japan’s 
strategy drawing on these case studies.