// Europe.

[The 21st Century History Wars]

On either side of the Atlantic, we are witnessing intense conflicts over questions of cultural hegemony and national identity that have catapulted debates over “history” to the top of the political agenda. Everywhere in the West, the struggle over who gets to define the national story – and which place legacies of racism, slavery, colonialism, and imperialism should occupy in it – is in full swing. This course examines how Western societies are currently confronting the darker periods and events in their past, the struggle to come to terms with the past, the cultures and politics of memorialization, and the wars over which version of “history” should / should not be told – with all the serious political and cultural implications this entails for the present and the future. We will also address the question of whether there is something to be “learned” from Germany’s “Vergangenheitsaufarbeitung,” as has recently been suggested in the U.S. – the German attempts to grapple with the Nazi crimes in earnest and integrate them in the nation’s collective imaginary in a way that would define and help guide the country.

[Renaissance to Modern Art]

On either side of the Atlantic, we are witnessing intense conflicts over questions of cultural hegemony and national identity that have catapulted debates over “history” to the top of the political agenda. Everywhere in the West, the struggle over who gets to define the national story – and which place legacies of racism, slavery, colonialism, and imperialism should occupy in it – is in full swing. This course examines how Western societies are currently confronting the darker periods and events in their past, the struggle to come to terms with the past, the cultures and politics of memorialization, and the wars over which version of “history” should / should not be told – with all the serious political and cultural implications this entails for the present and the future. We will also address the question of whether there is something to be “learned” from Germany’s “Vergangenheitsaufarbeitung,” as has recently been suggested in the U.S. – the German attempts to grapple with the Nazi crimes in earnest and integrate them in the nation’s collective imaginary in a way that would define and help guide the country.

[The European Economy].

Over the last two centuries, European economic integration has 
proceeded in spurts, with periods of enhanced integration followed 
by stagnation or even reversal. The post-World War II period in 
Europe stands out against this history as a sustained effort at 
improving economic integration in multiple dimensions. In this course, 
we will explore various components of this process, in three modules. 
We begin with a look at economic history and stylized facts; explore 
various aspects of European economic integration on the level of the 
EU and conclude by looking at issues addressed on the level of the 
individual member states, notably social systems and labor markets.

[The Vatican&Nazi War Criminals].

When the archives from the pontificate of Venerable Pope Pius XII 
(1939-1958) opened in March 2020, additional documentation for a 
long-debated aspect of World War II, Holocaust and postwar history 
became available: documentation related to Axis and Nazi war 
criminals who escaped from Europe postwar. Many fled to Latin 
America, but also to other continents, some with the help of 
Catholic priests and prelates. New studies and documents bring to 
light more detail about the so-called “ratline,” and address how 
much the Vatican Secretariat of State knew or did not know about 
such activity. In this course, students will read newly published 
primary source documents, as well as testimonies and films, 
describing the process of escape.

[Holocaust: Gender&Racial Ideol].

Holocaust: Examination of Gender and Nazi Racial Ideology. This 
course examines how Nazi racial ideology dictated people’s lives 
before and during the Holocaust. It will introduce students to 
various themes in the overlapping areas of gender in modern European 
history, history of the Third Reich and World War II with the main 
emphasis on the Holocaust. The class will discuss how gender and 
various racial groups became a focus of Nazi politics. Nazi 
persecution was not limited only to Jews who were deemed racially 
inferior. Their policy of annihilation, which also included people 
with disabilities, was aimed at excluding hereditarily “unfit” 
Germans from the nation. The ideological justification supported by 
scientists and medical staff escalated toward mass extermination of 
Germans with disabilities who along with Jews and Roma were counted 
among Nazi “biological enemies.” This course will explore the daily 
lives of men, women and children in Nazi Germany and occupied Europe, 
both from the perspective of victims, perpetrators and onlookers. 
The class will discuss to what extent pre-World War II gender roles 
helped victims not only develop important survival skills, but also 
affected the decisions of ordinary men and women to become killers. 
Using primary, secondary sources and film, we will analyze the 
experiences of men, women, and children during the Holocaust both 
from the perspective of victims and perpetrators. The different 
source materials will be historically contextualized to strengthen 
and expand the understanding of how Nazi policies affected both men 
and women, while examining how racial theory and the concept of a 
“master race” contributed to the suffering of Jews and other victims 
before and during World War II. This class does not require any 
background in Jewish, Holocaust or Gender studies.
