// Oceania and Islands.

[Understanding Modern Caribbean].

When it comes to the Caribbean as a region, international relations 
scholarship and policy discussions are often perceived through the 
lens of great power competition and the geo-political issues of the 
north, and ignore or minimize the agency and impact of small island 
developing states (SIDS) like those found in the Caribbean. Is there 
a need to alter conceptual and or theoretical frames to better 
understand the region? The Caribbean has often played an outsized 
and generally underappreciated role in world affairs as well as in 
U.S. domestic and foreign policy. The Caribbean region is an 
exceedingly diverse area in its cultural, socio-political, 
developmental, diplomatic, environmental, and geo-strategic profiles. 
Indeed, there is a spectacular quantum to discover intellectually 
from this region that is simultaneously an old and a new civilization. 
Also, due to an accumulation and a burst of creative and 
sustainability activities, there are innumerable opportunities to 
synthesize new knowledge for the use of decision-makers in policy 
formulation and programme development. This course will concern 
itself with both – the intellectual discovery of the region as well 
as an opportunity to develop and share new hypotheses and knowledge 
for a Caribbean civilization that is thriving in the 21st century. 
The broad themes of the course will be predicated on (1), identity 
and independence; (2), politics and geo-political dynamics; (3), 
diplomacy; (4), development models and sustainable development; (5), 
climate change, biodiversity, and the environment; (6), youth, 
ICT/digitalization, and the future coming toward the region.

[ThePacific:Past, Present, Future].

This course is aimed at establishing literacy in the Pacific Islands, 
their storied histories and their complex presents. It will take 
students through the Indigenous human geographies in the Pacific, 
the coming of Europeans and the establishment of spheres of 
influence through various economies and imperial activities. It will 
pay close attention to the causes and consequences of power shifts, 
the imposition of imperial powers and resistance to it as well as 
the movement of Asian people into the island Pacific as indentured 
plantation laborers from the mid-C19th. It will investigate the 
building of tensions that led to World War Two and what happened in 
its aftermath. From here the course looks at the reasons the Pacific 
Islands have returned to western focus as the frontline of climate 
change and more urgently still, driven by massive and recent Chinese 
attention as an extension of its Belt and Road Initiative. As well 
as paying close attention to perspectives from Washington, Canberra, 
Wellington, Paris and Beijing, this course will be Pacific focused, 
giving much attention to Pacific island actors, voices and perspectives, 
and framed around the urgent situation of the present.

[Geostrategic Comp in Pacific].

Competition for strategic influence in Oceania is becoming as 
crowded and complex as it was in the 19th and 20th centuries. While 
the United States, Australia, New Zealand, and France remain the 
dominant regional powers, China has poured in aid and investment 
dollars in recent years—and Russia, Indonesia, Japan, and India also 
increasingly seek to advance their interests among Pacific Island 
countries (PICs). The rivalry produces “strategic anxiety” even as 
it empowers PICs with greater choice of partners to help them meet 
pressing demographic, economic, environmental, and regional security 
concerns. Through a mixture of readings, guest lectures, and seminar 
discussions, this course explores the drivers behind international 
security politics in the Pacific from both extra- and intra-regional 
perspectives, including assessments of the extent to which traditional 
concepts, legacy agreements, and historical relationships remain 
useful for both PICs and external powers.

[Nobody's Backyard: Grenada].

In a theoretical gazing from the north, global affairs discussions 
and scholarship often focus on great power competition and ignore 
the agency and impacts of small states. Caribbean small island 
developing states in particular have played an outsized and often 
underappreciated role in world affairs as well as in U.S. domestic 
and foreign policy. Using a south-north conceptual view, this class 
will use the opportunity of the upcoming 50th anniversary of Grenada’s 
independence, the 45th anniversary of the Grenada Revolution and the 
40th anniversary of the U.S. invasion to engage with the roles, 
impacts and challenges of Grenada as a post-emancipation, 
post-colonial, small island developing state. The course will 1), 
provide a brief overview of the Caribbean in global affairs; 2), 
within that context, explore major distinguishing national themes 
and policy directions in Grenada’s nearly fifty years of 
nation-building, 3) take a special look at its history and enduring 
impacts inside and outside of Grenada, including independence, 
revolution and invasion as well as sports and popular culture; and 
4), consider the broader context of small island developing states 
and some small states in the world order. Learning will take place 
through lectures, readings, discussion, special guests and a project 
designed to advance student-specific interests. Classwork for INAF 
324 will be enhanced by an associated 1 credit course that will 
travel to Grenada over spring break to conduct on-the-ground student 
research and to look more closely at the people, policies, places 
and socio-cultural happenings relevant to the course.

[Australian-American Alliance].

This course examines the history, evolution and contemporary 
challenges in the Australian-American relationship. In broad terms, 
both Australia and the U.S. share a language, many cultural forms 
and traits, and a deep commitment to democratic ideals. Today, both 
share many common interests and challenges. Both have deep interests 
in Asia, which today drive their deep strategic relationship embodied 
in the ANZUS Treaty. This course focuses on the evolution of the 
Australian-American relationship from shared cultural and political 
ideals through to the evolution of the strategic alliance formed in 
the aftermath of World War II and deepened in the ensuing years.