// MENA.

[Power&Society: Arabian Peninsula].

This course provides a comprehensive examination of the social, 
economic and political trajectories and dynamics of the Arabian Gulf 
monarchies (i.e., Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, and the 
United Arab Emirates) and their role in shaping these states’ 
domestic, regional and international trends. It explores the 
transition of the Arabian Peninsula from the era of British imperial 
domination with local power secured by sheikhly authorities and 
tribal rules to the formation of the Gulf political entities in their 
modern forms solidified under clans and families’ rules. It provides 
an in-depth perspective on social transformations and political 
dynamics at play in Arab Gulf societies, including different forms of 
political absolutism and dissent. It critically surveys and reflects 
on important issues including tribal dynamics; gender patterns and 
family trends; youth political engagement and activism; citizenship 
and belonging; sharp social hierarchies and statelessness; labor 
migration; rapid urbanization and transformations of physical 
landscape across Gulf cities, among other issues. The course 
discusses the role of religion and competing nationalisms as both 
legitimizing variables for the Arab Gulf monarchies as well as 
elements undermining some of them, prompted by doctored domestic 
sectarianism and identity politics that facilitated sectarianization 
of domestic politics and regional geopolitical dynamics into further 
uncertainties and contingencies, mainly during and in the aftermath 
of the 2010-11 Arab popular uprisings.

[Qater,Energy,Security & Geopol].

The seminar’s goal is to offer an in-depth and novel exploration of 
how Qatar in particular, and other major energy players more 
generally, use their energy capabilities and resources as instruments 
of power that contribute to their national strategic and security 
priorities. The seminar will achieve this by offering a mix of 
lectures, discussions and presentations by a range of guest 
speakers – both scholars from academia and the policy world and 
practitioners working on energy security As the above underscores, 
this seminar is designed to provide students with an opportunity to 
consider Qatar as an international energy actor in the wider 
international system from several different perspectives. In doing so 
it will attempt to illuminate how Qatar is adapting to changing 
realities in the global energy markets and how it is using energy as 
a strategic instrument to navigate a challenging geopolitical 
landscape. This will include examining the emerging strategic 
opportunities as well as legal and national security risks in Qatar’s 
overseas energy assets and investments; Qatar’s evolving energy 
relations with a host of key regional (GCC, Turkey, Iran) and global 
(the US, Russia, China, South Korea, Japan, the UK) energy, trade and 
security partners; and how the quest for sustainability and the new 
reality created by the fourth (AI) industrial revolution are 
impacting on Qatar’s energy sector and relations with energy partners 
and competitors.

[Cultural Heritage: Arab World Arab Studies].

This course will engage with issues around cultural heritage 
(architecture, monuments, art, poetry, dance, natural environment, 
etc.), the impact of conflict on cultural heritage, and the role of 
governments, NGOs, and diplomatic missions in promoting and 
protecting cultural heritage. We will address definitions of cultural 
heritage, how cultural heritage figures into state and civil society 
agendas, the roles of tourism and museums, changing environments and 
climate change, the lives and positions of those who produce or live 
among cultural heritage, how the role of systemic racism and 
injustice at the national and international level threaten cultural 
heritage, indigenous peoples, and artists and artisans, how conflict 
and war impact cultural heritage, and the role of national and 
international laws in illegal circuits of arts and cultural heritage 
(the same circuits trafficked by arms, drugs, people). Students 
taking the course will develop an understanding of the issues 
around cultural heritage in the Middle East and North Africa, the 
circulation of objects, cultural products, and ideas, 
postcoloniality, global power structures, and indigenous and 
environmental activism, among others.

[Intro to Study of Arab World Studies].

This course provides a critical introduction to the main paradigms, 
methods, and approaches that have been used to study the Arab world. 
From Oriental Studies, modernization theory, and area studies to the 
disciplinary social sciences, we explore how specific social, 
historical, and political contexts affect knowledge production in 
and on the Arab Middle East and North Africa.

[Israel and World Politics].

This course will focus on Israel’s foreign policy and diplomacy from 
1948 until the present. We will discuss the main characteristics of 
its foreign policy, the tension between ideology and "realpolitik" 
and the decision making process. We will analyze Israel's relations 
with the United States, the European Union, Russia, the Arab states, 
Iran, Turkey, Africa, and the Vatican. Key documents of Israel's 
diplomatic history will be analyzed. The course will include a 
discussion of “diplomatic language”, the functions of Israeli 
embassies and consulates, diplomatic ranking and protocol, public 
diplomacy and diplomatic immunity. The course will include several 
diplomats as guest speakers as well as a visit to the Israeli Embassy. 
We will also view and discuss documentary films. This course will be 
taught by Ambassador(Ret) Zion Evrony, who most recently served as 
the Israeli Ambassador to the Holy See (2012-2016). Ambassador Evrony 
will share his experiences as a former Israeli diplomat for over 43 
years.

[Oil & Politics of the Gulf Arab Studies].

The Arab Gulf states are currently undergoing profound political and 
economic transformations at the domestic, regional, and global levels. 
During their state formation process in the 20th century, these states 
went from dependence on one natural resource, pearls, to another, 
fossil fuels. Home to over half of the world’s oil reserves, the Arab 
Gulf states have a distinct political environment. On the domestic 
front, the high dependence on hydrocarbon wealth coupled with the 
growing youthful demographic shifts has caused a dilemma in which 
these states endeavor to implement ambitious economic reform 
initiatives while attempting to maintain their political status quo. 
Several factors have contributed to the Arab Gulf states ascension in 
regional and international politics. The Arab Spring uprisings of 
2011 and their aftermath presented the Arab Gulf states with a host 
of political and economic challenges and opportunities. Multiple 
divisions and armed conflicts, both within the Persian Gulf and the 
surrounding region, have increased because of the changing political 
order. The Gulf states have taken the lead in regional politics and 
conflicts due to their vast wealth and stability relative to the 
broader Middle East region. Political Islam affects many of these 
conflicts and remains a formidable force to either curry favor or 
foment rivalries across the region. Additionally, the Gulf states 
have used their foreign aid to shape regional politics in favor of 
their interests. On an international scale, the critical juncture of 
high oil prices during the 2008 financial crisis allowed the Gulf 
Cooperation Council (GCC) states to take advantage of international 
investment opportunities in Western nations in the throes of 
recession. They used their economic leverage to amplify their 
influence and parlayed it into increased political power. Course 
Objectives: The course will analyze the dynamics of these 
increasingly important states within the context of four themes: 
1) state formation and institutional legacies 2) the domestic 
political landscapes attending to the politics of monarchies, 
parliaments, and various political blocks 3) regional politics with 
emphasis on conflict, aid, political Islam and hegemony 4) the 
ascension of the GCC states on the international scene and their 
relations with major powers. It will explore how these dynamics 
unravel for each Gulf state with attention to the varying histories, 
sociopolitical contexts, economic interests, different external 
shocks, and their strategic choices.

[China-MENA Relations].

China is an increasingly influential actor across the Middle East and 
North Africa (MENA) region. This course examines the pillars of 
Sino-MENA engagement and explores the economic, political, and 
sociocultural implications of growing Chinese involvement in the 
region. Students must consider these implications across various 
levels: government-to-government, firm-to-firm, and people-to-people. 
The course pairs thematic classes with relevant country case studies 
in modules consisting of two classes, enabling students to situate 
key themes and theoretical concepts within specific geographic and 
institutional contexts. The first class of each module introduces a 
theme or topic, while the second class incorporates a relevant country 
case study. In their associated assignments, students are encouraged 
to delve deeper into how a particular theme applies to the designated 
country case study or examine how a given topic/issue has unfolded in 
another Middle Eastern country of their preference. As part of the 
review section at the end of the course, students will be required to 
submit a longer comparative analysis that incorporates two or more 
country case studies.

[Palestinian Politics].

This seminar focuses on internal Palestinian politics – from the 
emergence of the modern Palestinian national movement in the years 
following the Nakba, through the trials and tribulations of the PLO 
in the 1970s and 80s, up to the present-day schism between Fatah and 
Hamas. A central focus of the course will be on the interplay between 
internal Palestinian politics and the peace process—how the Oslo 
process impacted the effectiveness of Palestinian political leaders 
and institutions and how the decisions by and constraints on 
Palestinian political actors, in turn, affected prospects for a 
diplomatic resolution.

[Evoln UN Role Isr-Pal Conflict].

From Resolution to Management and Prevention: The Evolution of the 
UN’s roles in the Israeli Palestinian Conflict. What can the UN’s engagements in the Middle 
East teach us about the Organization’s effectiveness? Upon completion 
of his term as UN Secretary-General in 2006, the late Kofi Annan told 
the Security Council that the region has “shaped the Organization 
like no other.” Indeed, despite the many wars and deep political 
changes that have occurred in the Middle East since the UN’s founding, 
it is the ongoing conflict between Israelis and Palestinians and its 
lack of resolution that continues to cast the longest shadow. 
Although the UN has not been at the center of every effort to resolve 
this most intractable of conflicts, its engagement in favor of 
partitioning Palestine into two states, one Arab and one Jewish, and 
intervention in the aftermath of every major Arab Israeli war, have 
all solidified its presence on the ground and enmeshed it in the 
region’s tragic politics in unprecedented ways. This course will 
examine the different phases of UN engagement in the Arab Israeli 
conflict, up to the present. It will focus on the role of member 
states, the institutional bodies of the UN, and that of successive 
Secretaries-General and their envoys, in the various efforts to 
manage, resolve and prevent violent conflict. The course will also 
analyze the prerogatives of the actors on the ground, the Israelis, 
the Palestinians, regional stakeholders, and their interplay with the 
UN’s political, development, humanitarian and human rights mechanisms 
in relation to the conflict. Finally, the course will look at the 
future of the UN’s engagement on the ground in the context of the 
overall goal of the UN, to maintain international peace and security.

[Untangle ME Relig/Polit/Ethinic].

This course will approach the Middle East quagmire by way of a 
historical discussion that centers on the problem of conflicting and 
confusing definitions and aspirations, both for those within the 
region and for those outside trying to understand what is operative 
within. The starting point will be theological, but the endpoint will 
be the interweaving of religion with other issues, such as politics, 
ethnicity, nationalism and economics. The goal is less to presume to 
solve the problem than to have a clearer understanding of why it is 
so difficult to solve.

[ReExmn Isr-Pal Crisis: Lit/Film].

This course will examine how Israeli and Palestinian literatures 
depict the “other” through text and image, from the early years of 
Zionism to the twenty-first-century. Using the methodologies of 
comparative studies, we will attempt to understand how each nation’s 
views evolved and changed over time, with a focus on works which 
shifted these perceptions in revolutionary ways. Various depictions 
of the “other” will be examined, such as the criminal, noble hero, 
sexual predator, the lover, the suicide bomber and the ally. We will 
also discuss how both art forms grappled with the many issues which 
together contribute to the conflict between Palestinians and Israelis, 
including: identity, language, class and the deceptively simple task 
of defining homeland. Weekly critical readings will include the 
theoretical ideas of Orientalism and post-colonialism, enabling 
students to understand both literatures within the wider context of 
world literature. Among the authors covered are: Yosef Chaim Brenner, 
S. Yizhar, Sami Michael, A.B. Yehoshua, Eli Amir, Amos Oz, David 
Grossman, Hanna Ibrahim, Emile Habibi, Atallah Mansour, Ghassan 
Kanafani, Mahmoud Darwish, Samir El-Youssef and Sayed Kashua. All 
readings, literary and critical, will be read in English translation, 
and five films will be screened as part of the course.

[Education in MENA: Knowldg&Pol].

This course explores the interplay of knowledge and power in the 
constitution of educational institutions and policies in the Middle 
East and North Africa (MENA), as well as in defining appropriate and 
desirable forms of knowing, teaching and learning. In the course, we 
will examine a number of key questions related to education in MENA, 
namely: -How are educational institutions and “legitimate” forms of 
knowledge shaped by religious, economic, cultural and political 
forces? -How did colonization and other Western interventions shape 
education in MENA and what are its enduring effects? -How has the 
expansion of state-funded public schooling contributed to the 
processes of state formation and power consolidation in the region? 
What have been the unintended effects of these processes? -What are 
the primary debates, tensions and challenges related to educational 
developments in the region today? -How have global educational 
policies, assessments and measures come to shape educational policy 
in the region?

[Comp Politics of Middle East].

This course is intended to introduce students to the politics of the 
Middle East by exploring some of the main political and social 
problems facing the region today. The topics covered emerge from 
academic, policy, and everyday debates about real-world questions 
and challenges that have affected and continue to affect the lives of 
people in the Middle East. We will debate these questions ourselves, 
and scrutinize how they have been studied and analyzed by scholars 
who work on the region. We will also dwell on more fundamental 
questions of how research agendas emerge, which questions end up 
being studied and why, and the relationship between area studies 
knowledge and general theories of comparative politics. Each week we 
will read four important works that each in their own way seek to 
make sense of a set of puzzles or questions related to that week’s 
topic. These works include a mix of ‘classic’ texts in the field of 
Middle East comparative politics and newer research on the same 
questions. We will also, where possible, integrate other types of 
media, like memoirs, novels, and films. The focus of the course is on 
the 20th and 21st centuries, though occasionally we may discuss more 
historical periods. The course is structured as a survey and, as such, 
we will be aiming to cover a broad range of topics, including state 
formation, authoritarianism, oil and rentierism, political Islam, 
conflict, sectarianism, and the Arab Spring revolutions. The topics 
we will cover are certainly not exhaustive, but they are selected to 
capture some of the most significant debates and questions that have 
motivated research on the region. Students will have the opportunity 
in their final assignments to delve more deeply into one of these 
topics, or to explore one that we haven’t covered in the course.

[Media in the Middle East].

This course examines the various ways in which media, culture and 
politics intersect in the contemporary Arab Middle East. It is 
designed to assist students in understanding the role of the evolving 
Arab mediascape in shaping the socio-political information 
environment of a fast changing region. Students will be exposed to 
and engage in discussions about various media theories, issues, 
forms and practices. A broad range of topics will be covered 
including the history and development of the Arab press, the rise of 
satellite television, the political economy of Arab media, the 
mission of Arab journalism, the Al Jazeera phenomenon, and the advent 
of new and alternative media. Special attention will be paid to the 
role social media and satellite television has played in the 
momentous changes which shook the region during the Arab Spring. 
Equally of interest is the uneven role of media in the Arab world’s 
transformation process, particularly the disjunction between the 
liberating potential of transnational and new media which teem with 
censor-free content, on the one hand, and the authoritarian 
political culture of the region, on the other hand. We will also 
dwell on the relationship between media and state security and 
reflect the contribution of political communication to the emergence 
of an Arab public sphere, the consolidation of a transnational 
identity, and the reconfiguration of citizenship. We will consider 
the extent to which both news and entertainment media create new 
communicative spaces for social action and engender contestatory 
politics. Equally relevant are the ways in which locally-produced 
media in the Arab world respond and adapt to globalization.

[Post 1979 Pakstn,Afghan,Iran].

No single year in modern history has had more significant impact on 
the Muslim world than 1979. Pakistan, Afghanistan and Iran were at 
the epicenter of the year’s history making events whose consequences 
continue to live among us all. These included the Islamic revolution 
in Iran in February 1979 and the start of three decades and a half of 
Iran US tensions, and the execution of an elected Prime Minister by a 
military dictator in Pakistan setting up the long army rule and 
process of Islamization. Then came the US hostages crisis in Tehran 
in November and the burning of the US Embassy in Islamabad, signaling 
the merger of Pakistani and Iranian anti Americanism that began 
feeding a broader sentiment against the US in the Muslim world. The 
year ended however with its most consequential event: the Soviet 
invasion of Afghanistan in December 1979.The US-led jihad against the 
Soviets, assisted by Pakistan, won but ended up as a bittersweet 
victory as it laid the foundation of a deadly extremist religious 
infrastructure that started beating to the rhythm of global Islamic 
revivalism unleashing uncontrollable forces of radicalism. They had a 
horrendous impact on the region and on the US and global security, 
the most tragic and visible sign of which was 9/11.The course will 
look at all these dramatic and history changing developments and 
their complex intertwining with local, regional and global issues 
and challenges. It will examine how Pakistan’s national vision, 
embraced by years of authoritarian rule and troubled democracy, rise 
of religious orthodoxy, and strategic over extension by its ambitious 
army led to a weak institutional architecture that collided with its 
domestic tensions, opening up Pakistan to long years of instability 
and extremism, which only are beginning to be brought under control. 
The democracy is beginning to stabilize and Pakistan’s on going 
efforts against extremist and militant organizations are proceeding 
slowly but steadily. How will Prime Minister Imran Khan handle these 
challenges?The course will study the attempts by Iran to export its 
revolution, the development of its nuclear program, the challenges 
Iran posed to the US power in the Middle East and its allies, and 
the looming strategic shadow of Iran over the region, especially 
following the forces of instability released by the unsuccessful Iraq 
war. And the course will also look at nearly four decades of strained 
relations between Iran and the US.The course will study the just 
finished war in Afghanistan and the ongoing fight against Al Qaeda, 
the newly arrived terrorist outfit in Afghanistan-Pakistan border 
region—the ISIS-K and its interplay with the Taliban and what role 
can be played in these conflicts by Pakistan which itself has been a 
target of terrorism emanating from Afghanistan.It will also look at 
how Afghanistan has endured one of the most devastating conflicts of 
our time, while simultaneously struggling with the building of 
“political institutions, structures of governance, (and) vital state 
institutions” and what may lie in store for this country after the 
return to power of the Taliban who are facing daunting task of 
addressing the economic free fall of Afghanistan and its security and 
stabilization challenges after the US withdrawal . Also how will the 
Biden administration will cope with the Afghanistan challenge. Another 
relevant question that the class will analyze includes what roles 
could Pakistan and the US could play in the stabilization of 
Afghanistan following the end of America’s war there?And finally with 
the lengthening strategic shadow of China over the region it will be 
interesting to see what role China may play in the future of 
Afghanistan. Also interesting to watch will be India’s role and that 
of Iran in this strategic power play likened by some to the ancient 
Great Game.The Iran nuclear deal has been abrogated by Washington and 
sanctions re imposed on Iran. It will be interesting to see whether 
the Biden administration returns to the deal and on what terms 
specially after the election of a hard line President. What would be 
the prospects of thaw if the nuclear deal is revived —what it would 
mean for their bilateral relations and emergence of possible new 
strategic alignments in the region. The course may thus also be 
relevant to an extent for those interested in the Middle Eastern 
studies.

[Turkish Foreign Policy].

Turkey has always been renowned for occupying a strategic position 
and having a foothold in one of the most sensitive regions of the 
world. For many years, Turkish diplomats were keen to point out 
that Turkey was located in an “unfriendly neighborhood”. During the 
Cold War, Turkey was a front-line state, situated on the edge of the 
USSR and was perceived to be an indispensable actor against the 
spread of communism and has been the only Muslim member of NATO since 
it became a member in 1952. Furthermore, Turkey is the only Muslim 
country which has begun full accession negotiations with the European 
Union and the possibly the only country which has strived for over 
half a century to consolidate liberal democratic norms. The country 
and its people pride themselves in the fact that they have never 
been ruled by a foreign country and the modern republic’s predecessor, 
the Ottoman Empire was a land-based imperial power. In today’s world, 
interest in Turkey and Turkish foreign policy is growing exponentially, 
particularly following the so-called Arab Spring, where Turkey is 
being portrayed as a ‘model’ for regional Muslim countries to emulate. 
Over the last two decades, Turkey has grown economically, as well as 
become increasingly politically stable (in terms of government 
longevity). As Turkey’s national and per capita incomes have risen, 
so too has the country’s economic interests, both regionally and 
globally. This has prompted several questions: to what extent is 
Turkey becoming the regional power and to what extent is Turkey 
likely to move beyond its traditional western foreign policy 
commitments in pursuit of its diversifying economic and strategic 
goals? The course is designed to focus on providing students a clear 
understanding of the determinants that go into the making of Turkish 
foreign policy in republican times (1923-present). A general survey 
of Turkish foreign policy will be completed in the first half of the 
semester. This will give students both a chronological and historical 
understanding of the development of international politics surrounding 
Turkey. This is followed by a regional analysis of foreign policy 
goals and developments in the contemporary period, in aid of 
answering the questions posed above.

[Sporst, Pols & Society in ME].

In this “Politics of Sports” class we will read and discuss chapters 
from “Sport, politics, and society in the Middle East” which is 
edited by Danyel Reiche and Tamir Sorek. We will learn about 
different aspects of the study of sport, including: which actors and 
institutions in sport politics matter, how the process of sport 
policy-making works in different countries, how sport is used as a 
foreign and domestic political tool, which ideologies drive sport 
policy-making, and why mega-sporting events have become a 
much-discussed topic in regional and global affairs. In addition to 
our discussions on the textbook, Professor Reiche will give 
presentations about research he has conducted on the politics of 
sport. These will include a review of elite sport policies around the 
world, issues of sport and nationality such as sporting federations’ 
eligibility criteria to represent a country in international sport, 
the sporting boycott of Israel by some Middle Eastern countries such 
as Lebanon and Iran, and Qatar’s motives behind hosting the soccer 
World Cup 2022.

[Electoral Systems in MENA].

The purpose of this course is to analyze with the theoretical and 
methodological framework of comparative perspective the different 
types and electoral systems in Middle East and North African 
countries–from Morocco to Afghanistan, including the Arabian 
Peninsula, Iran, Turkey and Pakistan– and the most relevant electoral 
processes that have taken place in the region in the last two 
decades, from the Gulf War (1992) until the ‘Arab spring’ (2011). 
The course will focus on the changes in the political systems and 
regimes, and on the implementation of new electoral rules and 
elective chambers, as well as their influence in the electoral 
results and the consequences in the party and political systems. The 
course will also discussed the influence of external –US, UN, UE, 
international and regional media– and internal factors –local media, 
political associations, women participation– in shaping those 
changes, as well as the role of the international organizations 
dedicated to electoral assistance. The comparative politics approach 
will be useful to understand why all MENA region started a rapid wave 
of change toward a democratization process in a short period of time 
started with the ‘Arab Spring’ of 2011, and why this did not happened 
before.

[Warfare in the Middle East].

This class will help students understand the role that warfare and 
military operations have played in the development of the modern 
Middle East, and in the region’s international relations today. It 
will cover the military campaigns of many of the most important 
Middle Eastern conflicts with a particular emphasis on how the course 
and outcomes of those conflicts shaped future military actions and 
defined the power relationships of the region today. It will examine 
both conventional wars and insurgencies to highlight the differences 
in goals and results, and why insurgency has become more commonplace 
throughout the region. These classes will dwell on the lessons 
learned by each side as a result of each conflict, and how each 
attempted to adapt its armed forces and/or strategy to better fight 
the next war. In this way, each class will help the student develop 
an understanding of the evolution of warfare in the Middle East since 
1945, both in terms of war fighting and the use of military 
operations as a tool of statecraft. The course also employs the 
history of recent campaigns as a foundation for an examination of 
modern Middle Eastern states and their ability to generate military 
power, wage wars, and employ military operations to advance their 
political and security agendas. The course considers in considerable 
depth how the politics, economics and culture of Arab society affect 
the military development, combat operations and effectiveness of Arab 
armed forces. It examines the range of societal factors that both 
empower and impinge upon Israeli military power, as well as the 
development of the modern Iranian armed forces as a function of the 
Islamic Republic’s peculiar political, diplomatic, economic and 
social circumstances.