// Russia and Eastern Europe.

[Russian Military Power].

The Russian military has recently re-emerged on the global stage as 
an influential and formidable force that has challenged the existing 
world order and enabled a more muscular Russian foreign policy. This 
course explores a broad and inclusive study of the modern Russian 
military, drawing insights from military history, theory, doctrine, 
and politics. The course is advanced, but has no prerequisites and 
assumes no prior knowledge of Russian studies. The organization of 
the course is principally thematic, and will engage a discursive 
approach to draw out the political, economic, social, and 
technological developments of the current Russian military, with 
forays into the earlier Soviet era. First, we will consider Russia’s 
military past and how history shaped Russia’s military doctrine and 
thinking. Second, we will review patterns in Russian strategic 
thinking and recent efforts to update and reform Russian military 
doctrine for the 21st century. Third, we will review Russia’s recent 
operational experiences to contemplate Russia’s capability to adapt 
and refine its doctrine for modern combat. In addition to the weekly 
readings listed below, I encourage you to read broadly on the topics 
of discussion, including drawing upon political and analytical 
commentary, contemporary literature, recent cinema, and other 
primary texts to investigate a multifaceted view of the military in 
the Soviet and contemporary Russian experience. The course has two 
essential goals: (1) to present a basic introduction to the modern 
Russian military; and (2) to use the study of the Russian military 
as a means for honing skills in political analysis.

[The Future of Russia].

With Russia’s next presidential election only four years away, 
Russia is approaching what is likely to be a major turning point, 
both in its internal politics and its external relations. After 
twenty-four years under one leader, Vladimir Putin, where will Russia 
go from there? Will “Putinism” survive after Putin’s departure? In 
Moscow, the guessing game has begun, with signs that it is already 
destabilizing Russian politics. This will not be an ordinary political 
succession, because the very context of Russia’s future is about to 
change. The era of global climate change has begun, and it is on its 
way to becoming the defining issue of our century. And of all the 
countries that stand to be affected by climate change, Russia is at 
the top of the list. Russia is one of the most dependent on the 
export of hydrocarbons. One-third of its territory lies north of the 
Arctic Circle, and its Arctic coastline stretches for 24,000 
kilometers, much of it consisting of permafrost. Its forests, 
vulnerable to disease, drought, and fire, are the world’s largest, 
and account for over half of Russian territory and one-fifth of the 
world’s forested area. And as the world’s fourth-largest emitter of 
CO2 and many harmful pollutants, Russia is both one of the chief 
causes and victims of global warming. The rapidly-evolving battle 
against fossil energy affects Russia particularly. Russia has the 
world’s largest reserves of oil and gas, but the combination of 
renewable energy, technological advances, and tighter climate 
regulation will bring a peak in global oil consumption, perhaps as 
early as 2040, followed by a steady decline, together with lower 
prices This in turn will cause a fall in income from oil exports, 
which currently account for nearly half of the Russian government’s 
revenues. Income from natural gas, though it will grow strongly for 
the rest of the century, will not be sufficient to fill the gap. 
This will cause Russian economic growth to slow, and government 
budgets to decline. Regional inequalities will increase, as the 
eastern two-thirds of Russia lose ground compared to the westernmost 
third. How does Russia perceive the issue of climate change, and how 
is it reacting? Do policy-makers perceive the oncoming threats, and 
what are they doing about them? How will various sectors of the 
economy be affected? What role will Russia play in the evolving 
international politics of climate change? Will Russia’s status as a 
great power still endure by mid-century? In short, what will be the 
future of Russia in the era of climate change? That is the subject 
of this seminar.

[Russian Hybrid Warfare].

The cyberattack against Estonia in 2007, the invasion of Georgia in 
2008, the annexation of Crimea in 2014. Bots, trolls, and information 
operations. Manipulation, influence, and deniability. “Illegals,” 
“patriotic hackers,” and “little green men. Oligarchs, compatriots, 
and useful idiots. Since the US election in 2016, there has been 
increased visibility of the Kremlin’s new way of war and how it 
targets our societies and citizens. This course will cover the 
Russian doctrine and ideology that lays the groundwork for the 
Kremlin’s global imperialist insurgency; discuss examples and case 
studies of these tactics and operations, as well as their history; 
and explore why it is so challenging for the United States and its 
allies to combat full-spectrum/hybrid warfare. Course materials will 
leverage first-hand accounts of those on the front lines of 
identifying and countering the Kremlin’s shadow warfare.

[The Putin Generation].

Vladimir Putin was elected to the Russian Presidency in March, 2000. 
He could remain in office until 2036, at which point he would be 84 
years old. Over the past quarter century a new generation of 
Russians has grown up knowing no leader other than Putin. This 
course seeks to understand how these young Russians, sometimes 
called the "Putin Generation," see their lives, their country's 
leadership, and Russia's - as well as their own - role in the world. 
In some ways, this generation is very different from their parents 
and grandparents, in other ways they are surprisingly similar. Their 
behavior, their likes, dislikes and political views are being 
examined by Russian social scientists. Our course materials include 
those studies, along with results of public opinion polling and the 
voices of those young Russians, expressed in social media, music and 
art, as well as support and protest against Vladimir Putin. During 
the semester, on Skype, we will discuss issues directly with young 
Russians. This course will be conducted as a seminar, with two 
required papers on any aspect of what SFS students have learned in 
class or in their individual research. Knowledge of Russian is 
helpful but not required.

[Looking for Trouble in Cn Asia].

This course will focus on Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, 
Turkmenistan, and Uzbekistan. These countries are mostly seen as the 
undifferentiated and static “post-Soviet ‘stans,” as the object of a 
“Great Game” between global and regional powers, or for what they 
mean to conflicts outside the region, like Afghanistan and the 
Middle East. In this course we will dive into what drives conflict 
inside the region itself and try to understand great power 
competition and collaboration from the perspective of the Central 
Asian countries. Along the way we will get to know the recent 
history of the different countries individually as well, and 
students will learn how to keep up on and analyze events in the 
region. We will start with how the trauma of perestroika and the 
collapse of the USSR shaped the new countries of the region. We will 
examine the revival of Islam in the region and how Central Asians 
became involved with the Islamic state; the rise of nativist ethnic 
nationalism; economic dependence on labor migration; resource 
conflict and climate change and the complicated borders in the 
region. We will also look at how great power competition and 
geopolitical develops in China, Afghanistan, and Ukraine have 
challenged the security of the region.