// South and Latin America.

[BRA, Development & Complexity].

This course is structured to support and promote a rigorous and 
pluralistic understanding of Brazil in its domestic and international 
multiple dimensions. Although Brazil shares some of its neighbors’ 
characteristics, the history, economy, social structure, and 
political dynamics of the only Portuguese speaking country in the 
Western Hemisphere recommend an approach taking into consideration 
its specificities Based on an interdisciplinary perspective, the 
course will work with different levels of abstraction. We’ll review 
and update critically the different theoretical approaches to 
Development, including the ones within the framework of the new 
paradigm of Complexity Theory and, concomitantly, we will articulate 
that analysis with concrete elements of Brazil’s long term historical 
trajectory in order to give intelligibility to processes that cannot 
be reduced to chronological sequences.

[Pol of Hum Rights: LA in Compar].

This advanced seminar will focus on the politics of human rights and 
challenges to effective protection of human rights. In order to gain 
some depth in relation to the issues that could be addressed, the 
seminar will delve into only four themes or types of human rights 
violations: enforced disappearance; deprivation of liberty (and 
inhuman treatment and torture); executions (right to life); and 
violence against women. Selected Latin American countries will be 
used to explore these themes, including Argentina, Colombia and 
México. The primary regional focus of the course will be on Latin 
America; however, the seminar will use material arising out of other 
contexts, such as Indonesia and the United States of America. 
Cross-regional and comparative analysis is also encouraged in 
discussions and research. Course reading draws on relevant 
literatures in political science, social sciences and law, including 
textbooks, academic articles, legal decisions, and international 
treaties and other legal instruments. Legal training is not required. 
Readings also include in-depth reporting and exposés on major human 
rights events in Latin American countries. Complementarily, we will 
view films (fiction and documentary) that offer a vivid perspective 
of the problems being analyzed. Throughout the course we will 
consider the practical dimensions of human rights activism, and the 
legal and policy implications of the subjects studied. Debates will 
concentrate on dilemmas that arise out of human rights practice, 
focusing on the fissure between standard-setting exercises and 
national implementation, and the growing gap between rhetoric and 
practice. We will review the role of the state in relation to 
development of international human rights law and reflect on the way 
the state has managed to fade as the object of concern of this 
(once state-centered) branch of international law.

[Latin Amern Govt and Politics].

This course offers an introduction to the contemporary politics of 
Latin America. The introductory section of the course considers 
historical dynamics and the foundation they laid for subsequent 
political and economic development in the region. We briefly examine 
the region’s colonial history, its wars of independence, and the 
struggle to construct nations and the emergence of industrialization 
in the 19th century. We also explore democratic development and the 
interventionist economic strategies that Latin American governments 
pursued through much of the 20th century, considering theories that 
seek to account for Latin American underdevelopment, the breakdown 
of democracy in the 1960s/1970s, and transitions from authoritarian 
rule in the 1980s. The rest of the course focuses on crucial 
contemporary questions. We consider democracy’s problems and 
pathologies; the various ways in which (and success with which) 
market reform has proceeded across the region; poverty, inequality, 
and informality; and the rule of law. We will also examine 
integration among Latin American countries, as well as the role the 
United States has played in the region. The final weeks of the 
course comprise case studies of a handful of Latin American nations.

[Culture & Power in Lat Amer].

Culture and Power in Latin America Latin American artists, 
intellectuals and activists, such as José Martí, Octavio Paz, 
Gabriela Mistral and Pablo Neruda, among many others, developed 
distinct theoretical frameworks with which they would understand and 
negotiate the region’s special geographic, political, economic, 
linguistic, and cultural conditions. In this course we consider 
these frameworks that reflect and engage significant debates 
regarding culture and power since the late nineteenth century 
through the present day. We examine a range of linguistic and visual 
forms, including narrative, poetry, documentary film, visual art, 
and performance, that emphasize innovative aesthetic techniques as a 
way to engage political and cultural hegemonies. To supplement our 
readings, we dialogue over Skype or in person with contemporary 
artists and activists as well as attend representations of Latin 
American and Latino culture in Washington, DC.

[Political Econ of Lat Amer].

The course focuses on several aspects of Latin America’s economic 
and political development. We will examine the different economic 
and political challenges facing the region and the different policy 
approaches developed to address them. The course combines insights 
from economics, political science and history to present different 
explanations associated with how politics influence economic policy 
and development and vice versa. Finally, we discuss the potential 
role of public policy to prevent or resolve these concerns. Key 
questions we will address are: How political factors influence the 
presence of economic crises in the region? Has the presence of an 
orderly, peaceful, and steady democratic rule improved economic 
performance in the region? Why is LA one of the most violent regions 
in the world and with higher levels of perceived corruption? Is the 
economic gap between the United States and Latin America driven by 
its different colonial experiences? Is the presence of abundant 
natural resources a “curse” for long-term development? Why did 
import substitution industrialization fail in LA while it succeeded 
in other countries? What should we expect of the political and 
economic development of the region in the future? The course also 
seeks to familiarize students with the most common empirical 
methodologies utilized in the field. As such, some lectures will 
include an overview of the relevant statistical technique needed for 
fully understanding the findings and assessing the credibility of 
key papers.

[Drug Trafficking: The Americas].

To provide students with a historical, comparative and contemporary 
examination of the evolution of drug trafficking in Latin America 
and several important drug control policies to combat this trade. 
The course takes a multi-disciplinary, historical and comparative 
country and regional approach in focusing on Bolivia, Peru, Ecuador, 
Colombia, Mexico, Paraguay, Brazil and the regions of Central 
America and the Caribbean. The course will provide students with an 
understanding of the evolution of drug trafficking strategies, 
related agro-industry organization, smuggling routes, money 
laundering practices, illicit markets and the mix of criminal 
organizations. It will also enable the students to examine the 
interplay of the illegal drug industry (cocaine, heroin and marijuana) 
along with related public policy (such as illicit crop eradication, 
extradition, interdiction, alternative development, counterinsurgency 
and other law enforcement and security measures) with globalization, 
social movements, guerrilla and paramilitary organizations, arms 
trafficking, migration, indigenous and popular Latin American 
culture, national and geo-politics, corruption, democracy, and 
socio-economic development.

[China Russia Polit in Americas].

This pioneering seminar examines the comprehensive political, 
economic and security relations of extra-regional powers with Latin 
America and the Caribbean since 1945, particularly the first two 
decades of the 21st century. Most Latin American countries have 
willingly sought to diversify their foreign relations, and therefore, 
have sought to strengthen relations with several extra-regional 
powers. Since the Monroe Doctrine, the Western Hemisphere has been 
a sensitive area for the United States, and Washington has always 
been concerned with the presence of extra-regional powers in the 
region. The 2017 U.S. National Security Strategy employs sharp 
language against China and Russia and calls for regional relations 
that “will limit opportunities for adversaries to operate from areas 
of close proximity to us,” and that “limits the malign influences of 
non-hemispheric forces.” In this course, we will examine thoroughly 
the immense effects of China’s engagement with the region; we will 
study the USSR and the Cold War in Latin America, as well as 
Russia’s recent return to the region under Putin. Additionally, we 
will analyze some historical and new links, such as the ones with 
EU countries, the Vatican, Japan, India, Israel and Iran, all the 
while using the comparative method.

[States& Societies: Lat Amer].

This course will analyze the major political trends and issues that 
have shaped Latin American governments and politics throughout the 
course of the twentieth century as well as the key issues confronting 
the region as it begins the 21st century. The study of Latin America 
has been a rich source of theory for political scientists, 
contributing to a general understanding of development issues, 
regime change, military rule and democratic transition, among other 
themes. As such, given the developments of the last decades (the 
return of military leaders to their barracks which ended in some 
cases decades of authoritarian rule, the great difficulties that 
practically all nations in the region have had in consolidating 
democratic governance, the rise of new social movements, the rise of 
a new left, exacerbated social and security tensions caused by drug 
trafficking and organized crime, and finally the persistence in some 
countries of old forms of armed violence) the theoretical models 
drawn from Latin America have also been applied to other nations in 
other regions experiencing comparable changes, in Eastern Europe and 
in parts of Asia and Africa. This course will examine several of 
these broad trends of politics in the region, focusing on the actors 
and processes which have shaped institutions, policies, parties, 
movements and political events in contemporary Latin America, The 
second half of the course will examine recent changes in politics, 
principally those relating to new social movements, identity, gender 
and ethnicity, drug-trafficking, political parties, and newer 
post-cold war conflicts. We will draw on some of the best social 
science literature, together with videos and films that elucidate 
contemporary political themes. The aim of this course is to promote 
a more comprehensive understanding and familiarity with the social 
science literature and approaches that have been used to study a 
key and vital region in international politics and the emerging 
global economy and polity.

[States & Societies: Lat Amer Latin American].

This course will analyze the major political trends and issues that 
have shaped Latin American governments and politics throughout the 
course of the twentieth century as well as the key issues confronting 
the region as it begins the 21st century. The study of Latin America 
has been a rich source of theory for political scientists, 
contributing to a general understanding of development issues, regime 
change, military rule and democratic transition, among other themes. 
As such, given the developments of the last decades (the return of 
military leaders to their barracks which ended in some cases decades 
of authoritarian rule, the great difficulties that practically all 
nations in the region have had in consolidating democratic governance, 
the rise of new social movements, the rise of a new left, exacerbated 
social and security tensions caused by drug trafficking and organized 
crime, and finally the persistence in some countries of old forms of 
armed violence) the theoretical models drawn from Latin America have 
also been applied to other nations in other regions experiencing 
comparable changes, in Eastern Europe and in parts of Asia and Africa. 
This course will examine several of these broad trends of politics in 
the region, focusing on the actors and processes which have shaped 
institutions, policies, parties, movements and political events in 
contemporary Latin America, The second half of the course will 
examine recent changes in politics, principally those relating to 
new social movements, identity, gender and ethnicity, drug-trafficking, 
political parties, and newer post-cold war conflicts. We will draw on 
some of the best social science literature, together with videos and 
films that elucidate contemporary political themes. The aim of this 
course is to promote a more comprehensive understanding and 
familiarity with the social science literature and approaches that 
have been used to study a key and vital region in international 
politics and the emerging global economy and polity.