// Music.

[Music, Politics & Diplomacy].

This course examines the use of music for political purposes. More 
specifically we will focus on the relationship between music and 
politics via diplomacy, social movements, torture, nationalism, and 
protectionism. Starting with a theoretical approach to the 
understanding of music, the course will draw on historical and 
contemporary examples of when music was used for political and 
diplomatic purposes—also as a tool to understand these purposes—in 
the Americas, Europe, the Middle East, Africa, and Asia. More broadly, 
this course aims to provide practical and theoretical tools to 
address the complex issues confronting the use of music for 
diplomacy, and to rethink political power beyond the nation-state. 
Methodologically, the course will introduce students to sound and 
performance analysis, among other non-textual approaches.

// Science.

[Science Innov & Entreprenuers].

The United States is widely recognized as one of the most innovative 
and entrepreneurial countries in the world. The question that this 
course focuses on is "Why is that?" What is the policy framework that 
shapes the US innovation ecosystem, that is, a set of policies and 
cultural beliefs that provide a dynamic environment that encourages 
risk-taking and invention. Often in the US we focus on the role of 
the lone entrepreneur, forgetting that they are rarely alone and 
often draw from government policies, programs, and research to 
develop innovative products and processes. This course focuses on 
the intersection of science, technology and innovation policy – 
examining how our national innovation ecosystem works, with a 
particular focus on health, energy, high-tech products and 
manufacturing. A major emphasis of the course is the role of 
public-private-partnerships and the role federal and state 
government’s role in the innovation ecosystem. The underpinnings of 
the U.S. innovation system are examined as are the approaches of 
other nations to science and technology policy. There is a special 
focus on the steps needed to transition ideas from universities and 
laboratories to the market and the respective roles of public 
incentives that work in combination with angel investors and venture 
capital. The overall goal is to build a better understanding of the 
realities of the U.S. innovation system as well as the challenges it 
faces and the opportunities it provides. The class will conclude with 
student assessments of policies that could help fill gaps in global 
innovation and the manufacture of products to meet global needs in 
health, energy and security--all areas where innovation plays a key 
role.

[Examining Crises through Sci].

News headlines around the world are dominated by crises and disasters 
involving major threats to basic human needs for security, clean water 
and air, food, and health: Cape Town, South Africa is at risk of 
running out of fresh water, an Ebola outbreak rages in West Africa, 
and honeybees are suddenly disappearing. In these cases and others, 
an understanding science is required to understand how the crisis or 
disaster happened, what caused it, and how it might be resolved. 
Science plays a critical role in informing governments, communities, 
non-profits and individuals who need to make important decisions in 
response to such crises. In this course, we will examine these cases 
and others through the lens of science. By studying these cases, you 
will develop a better understanding of the role of science in 
policy-relevant issues and international affairs. You will also 
develop a stronger understanding of the process of science and how 
scientific understanding is developed, tested, and revised. Given the 
complex, interdisciplinary nature of these issues, we will focus on 
learning scientific principles and methods from a broad array of 
scientific fields including biology, chemistry, geosciences, and 
environmental sciences. The course will also highlight the importance 
of interdisciplinary science. This course is cross-listed with 
ENST180-01.

// Migration.

[Transborder Resist, Resil, Rev].

This Multimedia Production Lab, explores contemporary feminist and 
Indigenous activisms on contested, yet invisiblized, global 
borderlands. Although “crossing” through the US/Mexico, 
Iran/Turkey/Syria, India/Burma/China, Haiti/DR, Israel/Palestine, 
Ethiopia/Eritrea, “border checkpoints,” the course expands the 
notion of borderlands, beyond its fixed geographical and political 
registers. We will explore the imaginary, symbolic, and psychological 
boundaries diasporas, refugees, and civil societies transgress as 
they struggle for— political, religious, disability, labor, LGBTQIA+, 
and Indigenous and women’s— rights. Students will produce multimedia 
work: an autoethnographic short story about their own border 
“transgressions;” and a 10-minute activist audio documentary 
expanding on a theme from the course.

[Sec Clim Change&Migration].

The purpose of this class is for students to examine a pressing and 
important global security crisis, propose conceptual management 
options, and derive potential future individual action participation 
paths for later exploration. The pressing global security crisis 
issue that the class will examine is developing policy for managing 
future climate change mass migration into Europe. More specifically, 
this course will examine the security crisis implications of future 
climate change migrations. Challenges to institutions, resource 
scarcity, urbanization, and sources and characteristics of conflicts 
will be surveyed. Theoretical and practical considerations regarding 
the re-shaping of the international order under these stresses will 
be analyzed. The goal of the course will be to understand key 
indicators of impending climate change migration crises, and 
postulate potential mitigation policies. That goal will be 
accomplished by establishing a solid foundation in climate change 
trends developments, surveying notable refugee and migration studies, 
examining EU immigration and security policy choices of recent years, 
and applying a theoretical model of successful crisis management 
practices.


[Immigrants, Refugees & State].

This course examines the causes and consequences of forced migration, 
focusing in particular on displacement from conflict and human rights 
violations. It begins with the history of the concept of 'refuge' and 
then traces the evolution of the international regime for protecting 
and assisting refugees and displaced persons. The course then focuses 
on current examples of displacement in Africa, Latin America, the 
Middle East, Central and South Asia, and Europe.

// Conflict, Peace, Security.

[Warfare / Lawfare].

Despite the United Nations’ claim to help “save succeeding generations 
from the scourge of war”, the world continues to suffer from genocide, 
military invasions, civil wars, and other forms of violent conflict. 
Debates continue to rage about how to fulfill ‘military necessity’ 
while protecting civilians from harm. When is it legal to resort to 
the use of force? How do laws regulate warfare to make it more 
‘humane’? Conversely, how is law used to justify war and to inflict 
suffering? This course will introduce students to the law and 
politics of initiating and conducting war, as well as reckoning with 
its consequences. It will also consider the practice of ‘lawfare’: 
the use of law as a weapon of conflict. Students will critically 
engage in discussions that explore the role of the use of force, 
also known as the Law of Armed Conflict (LOAC), or International 
Humanitarian Law, in shaping and regulating the global order. The 
course will cover the development of the laws of armed conflict, the 
key controversies that animate debates about the use of force, the 
role of the UN Security Council, humanitarian intervention, the law 
of occupation, information and cyberwarfare, among other topics. 
Using real-world examples such as the War on Terror, Iraq, Libya, 
Yemen, Afghanistan, Russia-Ukraine, and Israel-Palestine, the course 
will pay particular attention to critical analyses of lawfare/warfare 
in contemporary historical and interdisciplinary perspective. It will 
equip students with the language and the critical analytical tools 
necessary to understand the laws of war and their role in different 
contexts from around the world. It is recommended that students who 
enroll in this course will have taken the Public International Law 
course. It is not presumed that all students who take this course 
plan to go into law school. Rather, this course will be of particular 
interest to students who plan to pursue further studies and training 
in political science, international law, military and security studies, 
international relations, and conflict resolution.

[Water, Conflict, and Peace].

Water resources are in a state of crisis in many parts of the world. 
Despite such scarcity, water has been a catalyst for cooperation and 
environmental peace building among nations and other contending 
parties for millennia. In this course we will use regional case 
studies including farmer-herder confrontations in Africa, the 
weaponization of water, and a survey of existing water treaties and 
agreements, to better understand the dynamics of global hydro 
politics. Students will then be able to identify the contexts in 
which water is used and abused as an instrument of conflict and 
cooperation and to evaluate policy measures to achieve the most 
favorable outcomes.

[Nuclear Weapons & Int'l Security].

The purpose of the seminar is to explore the impact of nuclear 
weapons on international and regional security. The first part of 
the course deals with nuclear weapons design and development, the 
connections between nuclear power programs and nuclear weapons 
development, the causes and consequences of nuclear proliferation, 
and concepts of deterrence and stability. The second part addresses 
specific countries in their regional setting, Northeast and South 
Asia, the Middle-East, US-Russian security relations, and nuclear 
terrorism.


[Irregular War via Film].

In its inception, the “war film” and its creators have played 
prominent roles in, inter alia, setting political agendas, advocating 
policies, constructing images of the enemy other, defining civilization, 
manufacturing consent for or opposition to war, recreating and 
reproducing race and gender stereotypes. Most Americans, and likely 
citizens of other countries, will learn of wars not through formal 
studies of a conflict but through the cinematographic depiction of 
them. Unfortunately, despite the pervasive influence of film and other 
forms of popular culture, mainstream political science has generally 
considered these cultural artifacts unworthy of serious inquiry. This 
course departs from this intellectual position and contends that film 
can be an important medium through which we can understand 
international politics but, equally important, think critically about 
how films facilitate such understandings. This course begins with an 
overview of the essential practices and significant “languages” that 
film makers and writers use to create meaning through film. Learning 
the “grammar” of films will enable students to become more cognizant 
of how war and related concepts are portrayed in the popular culture 
they regularly consume and the understandings of those war such films 
facilitate. In this course, students will construct original arguments 
about how specific films create, reinforce or destabilize predominant 
views of war generally and specific wars in American society. To do so, 
we will closely study the ideas which are embedded in films as well as 
the techniques which film directors and writers use to convey a message 
or argument. After providing a foundation on how one reads a film, each 
of the subsequent twelve classes will examine a kind of conflict 
through the lens of at least two films that represent very different 
points of view. While the films are the most important “assignment,” 
I provide several readings intended to inform the student about the 
conflict depicted in the film. Topics covered in this course will 
include British and European colonial wars in Africa and Asia; the 
Vietnam War from the optics of French, American and Vietnamese citizens; 
the anti-Soviet war in Afghanistan; The First American Gulf War of 1991; 
the War on Terrorism; Peacekeeping and Peace-enforcing missions; the 
use of drones; intelligence failure; nuclear deterrence as well as a 
reflection upon race and gender in constructing heroism. At the end of 
this course, students will no longer be interested in watching films 
passively. They will find themselves talking back at the screen and 
with each other about the shenanigans or feats of genius in film 
whether it is the music that accompanies a scene, the choice of a 
landscape, or the kind of shot depicted. Because this course relies 
upon films that depict a variety of brutalities, it may not be for 
everyone.

[The Forensics of Mass Killings].

The Forensics of Mass Killings: Holocaust and Terrorist Crime Scenes. 
How do you conduct forensic investigations of genocide and mass 
killings on the ground? How do you examine the killing techniques of 
genocide and crimes committed in public or secret? How do 
perpetrators use propaganda for terrorism, genocide and follower 
recruitment? In the class, Fr. Patrick Desbois, a forensic 
anthropologist and author of "The Holocaust by Bullets" and "The 
Terrorist Factory" will answer these questions. Fr. Desbois will 
familiarize students with his recent investigation of crimes 
committed by ISIS in Iraq and Syria against the Yazidis and the 
crimes carried out by the Einsatzgruppen during the Holocaust. The 
class will compare ground investigation techniques, crime methodology 
and outcomes.

// Media.

[Oral Hist/Document. Filmmaking].

In this class, we will learn the oral history and documentary 
interviewing skills to create podcasts, documentary films, museum 
exhibits and multimedia projects. We will discuss the ethical 
challenges and creative strategies involved in research, interviewing, 
editing and dissemination. What are the cutting-edge technologies now 
making this field more accessible and exciting? Guest presenters will 
offer real world insights from their work in journalism, documentary 
and human rights advocacy. We will view documentaries from and about 
the Arab world as well as other regions. Take this class if you are 
interested in learning an oral history approach to interviewing, or 
are planning your own documentary project, ethnographic fieldwork or 
multimedia journalism. Final project will be the student’s choice: 
paper, audio or other media.

// Economics and Business.

[WTO Dispute Settlement].

The multilateral trading system is widely argued to be more 
“rules-based” than ever before. Dispute settlement under the World 
Trade Organization (WTO), in particular, is increasingly being called 
upon to adjudicate rights and obligations in international commerce. 
These decisions bear directly on business opportunities, both nationally 
and internationally. Indeed, not only do these decisions influence 
specific industries and trade-related measures, but the breadth and 
depth of “globalization” more generally. This course is about WTO 
dispute settlement and TradeLab is conducted under the auspices of 
TRADELAB, a Geneva-based NGO (see www.tradelab.org). The course 
begins by examining theories of political economy, setting the stage 
for an in-depth look at international trade law and WTO dispute 
settlement and spends the entire semester working on a would-be 
dispute for the Office of the United States Trade Representative. The 
case involves health and safety standards/technical specifications 
concerning labels. Students will decide from among several specific 
applications of the measure(s) notified to the World Trade 
Organization. Working with USTR, including through several direct 
meetings, we will consult with stakeholders in the US and abroad, as 
well as experts in the underlying law. Previous teams of TradeLab 
will also be consulted. Instructor approval required. This course is 
part of the CLab series. Admission to the C-Lab is by application and 
interview. Applications were open Sept. 4-Oct. 15, 2021. Please visit 
the application for more information, requirements, and eligibility.

[Geopolitical Risks in Intl Bus].

Geopolitical risks impact the operations and profitability of global 
businesses. Such risks can arise from conflicts among great powers, 
namely the United States, China, Europe, and Russia. They can also 
arise from ideological tensions, such as that between globalization 
and nationalism. Additionally, they can arise from poor country 
governance, such as corruption and weak rule-of-law. Risks to business 
operations and profitability may include physical damage, economic 
and financial sanctions, cyber-attacks, advanced-technology controls, 
tariffs, climate-related delicensing, nationalization/expropriation, 
anti-trust action, political censorship, public health policy actions, 
and capital controls, among others. This course uses data sets, as 
well as recent and current case studies, to provide students a 
grounding in how to identify, evaluate, and manage geopolitical risk 
exposures, as well as in how to address the impacts of geopolitical 
risk events as they occur.

[Pol Econ of Cities: LA & Asia].

This course will address the political economy of cities with a focus 
on Latin American and Asian cities. It will begin with general 
background, move onto issues and sectors, and then address city cases 
(approximately one-third each). The general background will address 
history, analytical tools, and cities as actors in the international 
system; and sectors such as transport, land use, and housing coping 
with the challenges of inequality, climate change, and rapid 
urbanization. Students should select a city with a population over 
100,000 in Latin America or Asia, and have the selection approved by 
Prof. King. Students will be expected to follow the selected city 
throughout the semester, do a presentation to the class on “their” 
city, and produce a final paper comparing the chosen city with 
another city (from anywhere in the world, with both facing similar 
challenges), their challenges, focusing on one specific challenge, 
the policy responses, and results. It is strongly recommended that 
you can read the language of the cities in question in order to 
access sufficient background information, including media. The 
learning objectives of the class include: -Understanding how cities, 
esp. in Latin America and Asia, have developed over time. 
-Understanding the dynamics of key sectors, notably transport, land 
use, and housing, within the broader context of urban finance and 
governance -How to gather relevant data and information on cities in 
these regions -Grappling with urban challenges and the policies to
address them -Presenting key challenges and policy responses of 
individual cities

[Business - Eurasia/Turkey/China].

This course is designed for students that aspire to be multi-sector 
global business practitioners. Having the knowledge of "how to do 
business" is critical. What are the right questions? How do you know 
what information is relevant and what is not? The course’s core 
regional focus is Eurasia (the CIS countries), but is “book-ended” by 
significant exploration also into business dynamics in two of the 
region’s largest and influential neighbors, Turkey and China. At the 
end of the course, students should have a solid and practical 
understanding of “what it takes” to do business globally — heavily 
influenced on what they have learned in Eurasia, Turkey and China. We 
will host global business practitioners and explore key but practical 
topics, such as: Logistics/Export/Import procedures; Trade/Export 
Finance; Investment finance; Intercultural factors regarding 
negotiations; Human Resources practices and other critical modules. 
The course’s core requirement is a consulting assignment that matches 
students with an actual client to produce a business/marketing plan. 
Other aspects of the course include: Case Studies, an oral exam and 
an expectation of strong participation and teamwork.

// Religion.

[History of the Jewish People].

According to American writer, Pearl S. Buck, “If you want to 
understand today you have to search yesterday.” This course is a 
vibrant, comprehensive journey through history that uses a 
multi-disciplinary approach to bring to life the people, movements 
and events, that shaped the Jewish nation and left a lasting impact 
on the world at large. Using documentaries, films and 
autobiographical works of literature which communicate a people’s 
lived-experience, the course will comprehensively cover the history 
of the Jewish people, in detail from ancient to contemporary times. 
As a result, students will gain a thorough understanding of important 
movements and events which continue to be of worldwide importance 
today: the birth of Judaism, the creation of the Hebrew Bible, the 
ideology of Zionism, the experience of the Holocaust, the 
establishment of a Jewish state and the development of the Middle 
East conflict. Comprehensive coverage will make accessible these 
complex events and issues, endowing students with both thorough 
historical knowledge and the ability to navigate media coverage of 
these issues in the news today. No prior knowledge of Jewish history 
or culture is necessary. Two documentaries and four films will be 
screened as part of the course, which fulfills the HALC requirement. 

[Race, Religion, and Terrorism].

Going beyond America, this course takes a global approach to identity, 
race and religion. We do this through history, ideas, political 
movements, narratives, geopolitics, and assess the consequences for 
world order. We seek to understand race, religion and terror not as 
the past, but as a study of the patterns and causes of change. 
Students are then able to connect the dots between the past and 
present of major terrorist movements and/or conflicts. We evaluate 
future trajectories for the intersection of race, religion, and 
terrorism.

[Muslim Women & the West].

Muslim women often appear in Western imagination as oppressed, 
silent, and victimized. This course offers an alternate account of 
Muslim women by centering texts and aesthetics produced by them, 
along with ethnographic studies that give us a glimpse into their 
lives in the West. We encounter Muslim women through non-normative 
frames of agency, joy, community-building, and care. We observe the 
myriad ways in which they construct preferred futures against racist, 
capitalist, and heteronormative logics. A major thrust of the course 
is studying the lifeworlds of Shia Muslim women (a minority 
interpretive community within Islam).

// Politics, Governance, and Foreign Policy.

[Women & National Ident in Gulf].

This course will provide an introduction to the origins, histories 
and present natures of a range of different nationalisms and national 
identities in the contemporary world. It will begin by surveying 
rival theories concerning the origins of nationalism, and the nature 
of kinship, ethnic, religious and state identities in ancient and 
medieval history. It will then proceed to a detailed examination of 
particular national traditions and identities, and how they have 
changed over time. There will be a particular focus on nationalism in 
the most important contemporary states (the USA, China, Russia and 
India), and on nationalism in the countries of the Muslim world.

[Statecraft and Negotiation].

This course will look at American foreign policy through the lens of 
statecraft. Statecraft involves the orchestration of all the 
instruments of power and influence to protect against threats and to 
promote broad national interests. Key elements of statecraft include 
developing strategy, defining objectives and purposes, identifying 
the means available for pursuing that strategy, and then knowing how 
best to employ those means. If there is one instrument or policy tool 
that is central to nearly all forms of statecraft, it is negotiations. 
This course will thus take a closer look at the American approach to 
negotiations and how best to pursue them. It will also explore 
mediation as a policy tool for helping to settle or defuse local and 
sectarian conflicts and as a means of promoting a more favorable 
image of the U.S. internationally. In doing so, it will present a 
practitioner’s guide and set of specific rules for negotiations and 
mediation. As the students will see, these rules apply to every walk 
of life whether one is negotiating a business deal or buying a house. 
All negotiations need to start with having a clear objective and 
understanding what leverage one can bring to bear in the talks. To 
set a context for understanding statecraft and how it can best be 
employed, the initial part of the course will focus on our ethos and 
self-image. The next section of the course will be geared toward 
distilling the essential parts of statecraft by looking at several 
historical and contemporary cases in which different administrations 
identified important American interests and employed a variety of 
policy tools to try to achieve them: US policy in advance of the Suez 
war in 1956 and the June 1967 war; German unification in NATO in 
1990/91; Bosnia; the Persian Gulf War; and, the Iraq war of 2003 and 
its aftermath. The third part of the course examines policy 
instruments such as negotiations and mediation from a practitioner's 
standpoint. The concluding part of the course will discuss issues 
that are confronting the United States today and explore how an 
effective approach rooted in statecraft would shape American choices, 
policies, and the tools used to carry them out.

[Theory and Politics Citizenship].

In this “The Theory and Politics of Citizenship” class we will read 
and discuss the book “Citizenship: What everyone needs to know” by 
Peter Spiro. It is a key function of nation-states to define the 
precise character of citizenship. By granting citizenship 
nation-states are determining who gets in (and is eligible for 
privileges such as public services in the domains of health and 
education, amongst others, and has obligations such as military 
service) and who does not. We will discuss the history of, forms of, 
and different approaches to citizenship. There are a variety of 
concepts for granting citizenship, ranging from birthright citizenship 
like in the United States, commonly known as jus soli, to citizenship 
inherited through parents (or, as in most Arab countries, specifically 
by the father), commonly known as jus sanguinis. Over time, the 
exclusive nature of citizenship has eroded and there are a growing 
number of dual citizenship holders around the world, although not 
each country officially permits it. More and more countries have eased 
the path towards naturalization, but eligibility criteria differ. 
France, for example, requires residence for five continuous years, 
demonstrable competency in the language, and a knowledge of the 
culture. In Qatar, applicants need to have lived as a regular 
resident in the country for not less than twenty-five consecutive 
years and have good knowledge of the Arabic language.

[Public Diplomacy on the Edge]

This seminar explores new horizons in the field of public diplomacy, 
defined as government activities intended to understand, inform, and 
influence foreign publics. We will discuss the profound disruptions 
9/11, Benghazi, and COVID-19 have had on the daily work of public 
diplomacy practitioners, often prioritizing a “virtual first” 
approach for what has traditionally been a face-to-face practice. 
Course participants will review case studies from Africa, Asia, 
Latin America, and the Middle East; analyze the influence of social 
media, mis- and disinformation, and great power competition on 
current practice and the future of the field; and develop a strategic 
public diplomacy implementation plan. Students will learn practical 
skills related to developing and executing public affairs strategies 
and social media campaigns, writing for the media, and briefing 
senior officials. The instructor is a career State Department Foreign 
Service Officer who specializes in public diplomacy. She has worked 
on crisis operations and stabilization efforts in Washington and 
served in Brazil, Niger, Pakistan, and Somalia. She is currently a 
Rusk Fellow at the SFS Institute for the Study of Diplomacy.

