// Economics and Business.

[WTO Dispute Settlement].

The multilateral trading system is widely argued to be more 
“rules-based” than ever before. Dispute settlement under the World 
Trade Organization (WTO), in particular, is increasingly being called 
upon to adjudicate rights and obligations in international commerce. 
These decisions bear directly on business opportunities, both nationally 
and internationally. Indeed, not only do these decisions influence 
specific industries and trade-related measures, but the breadth and 
depth of “globalization” more generally. This course is about WTO 
dispute settlement and TradeLab is conducted under the auspices of 
TRADELAB, a Geneva-based NGO (see www.tradelab.org). The course 
begins by examining theories of political economy, setting the stage 
for an in-depth look at international trade law and WTO dispute 
settlement and spends the entire semester working on a would-be 
dispute for the Office of the United States Trade Representative. The 
case involves health and safety standards/technical specifications 
concerning labels. Students will decide from among several specific 
applications of the measure(s) notified to the World Trade 
Organization. Working with USTR, including through several direct 
meetings, we will consult with stakeholders in the US and abroad, as 
well as experts in the underlying law. Previous teams of TradeLab 
will also be consulted. Instructor approval required. This course is 
part of the CLab series. Admission to the C-Lab is by application and 
interview. Applications were open Sept. 4-Oct. 15, 2021. Please visit 
the application for more information, requirements, and eligibility.

[Geopolitical Risks in Intl Bus].

Geopolitical risks impact the operations and profitability of global 
businesses. Such risks can arise from conflicts among great powers, 
namely the United States, China, Europe, and Russia. They can also 
arise from ideological tensions, such as that between globalization 
and nationalism. Additionally, they can arise from poor country 
governance, such as corruption and weak rule-of-law. Risks to business 
operations and profitability may include physical damage, economic 
and financial sanctions, cyber-attacks, advanced-technology controls, 
tariffs, climate-related delicensing, nationalization/expropriation, 
anti-trust action, political censorship, public health policy actions, 
and capital controls, among others. This course uses data sets, as 
well as recent and current case studies, to provide students a 
grounding in how to identify, evaluate, and manage geopolitical risk 
exposures, as well as in how to address the impacts of geopolitical 
risk events as they occur.

[Pol Econ of Cities: LA & Asia].

This course will address the political economy of cities with a focus 
on Latin American and Asian cities. It will begin with general 
background, move onto issues and sectors, and then address city cases 
(approximately one-third each). The general background will address 
history, analytical tools, and cities as actors in the international 
system; and sectors such as transport, land use, and housing coping 
with the challenges of inequality, climate change, and rapid 
urbanization. Students should select a city with a population over 
100,000 in Latin America or Asia, and have the selection approved by 
Prof. King. Students will be expected to follow the selected city 
throughout the semester, do a presentation to the class on “their” 
city, and produce a final paper comparing the chosen city with 
another city (from anywhere in the world, with both facing similar 
challenges), their challenges, focusing on one specific challenge, 
the policy responses, and results. It is strongly recommended that 
you can read the language of the cities in question in order to 
access sufficient background information, including media. The 
learning objectives of the class include: -Understanding how cities, 
esp. in Latin America and Asia, have developed over time. 
-Understanding the dynamics of key sectors, notably transport, land 
use, and housing, within the broader context of urban finance and 
governance -How to gather relevant data and information on cities in 
these regions -Grappling with urban challenges and the policies to
address them -Presenting key challenges and policy responses of 
individual cities

[Business - Eurasia/Turkey/China].

This course is designed for students that aspire to be multi-sector 
global business practitioners. Having the knowledge of "how to do 
business" is critical. What are the right questions? How do you know 
what information is relevant and what is not? The course’s core 
regional focus is Eurasia (the CIS countries), but is “book-ended” by 
significant exploration also into business dynamics in two of the 
region’s largest and influential neighbors, Turkey and China. At the 
end of the course, students should have a solid and practical 
understanding of “what it takes” to do business globally — heavily 
influenced on what they have learned in Eurasia, Turkey and China. We 
will host global business practitioners and explore key but practical 
topics, such as: Logistics/Export/Import procedures; Trade/Export 
Finance; Investment finance; Intercultural factors regarding 
negotiations; Human Resources practices and other critical modules. 
The course’s core requirement is a consulting assignment that matches 
students with an actual client to produce a business/marketing plan. 
Other aspects of the course include: Case Studies, an oral exam and 
an expectation of strong participation and teamwork.