// Migration.

[Transborder Resist, Resil, Rev].

This Multimedia Production Lab, explores contemporary feminist and 
Indigenous activisms on contested, yet invisiblized, global 
borderlands. Although “crossing” through the US/Mexico, 
Iran/Turkey/Syria, India/Burma/China, Haiti/DR, Israel/Palestine, 
Ethiopia/Eritrea, “border checkpoints,” the course expands the 
notion of borderlands, beyond its fixed geographical and political 
registers. We will explore the imaginary, symbolic, and psychological 
boundaries diasporas, refugees, and civil societies transgress as 
they struggle for— political, religious, disability, labor, LGBTQIA+, 
and Indigenous and women’s— rights. Students will produce multimedia 
work: an autoethnographic short story about their own border 
“transgressions;” and a 10-minute activist audio documentary 
expanding on a theme from the course.

[Sec Clim Change&Migration].

The purpose of this class is for students to examine a pressing and 
important global security crisis, propose conceptual management 
options, and derive potential future individual action participation 
paths for later exploration. The pressing global security crisis 
issue that the class will examine is developing policy for managing 
future climate change mass migration into Europe. More specifically, 
this course will examine the security crisis implications of future 
climate change migrations. Challenges to institutions, resource 
scarcity, urbanization, and sources and characteristics of conflicts 
will be surveyed. Theoretical and practical considerations regarding 
the re-shaping of the international order under these stresses will 
be analyzed. The goal of the course will be to understand key 
indicators of impending climate change migration crises, and 
postulate potential mitigation policies. That goal will be 
accomplished by establishing a solid foundation in climate change 
trends developments, surveying notable refugee and migration studies, 
examining EU immigration and security policy choices of recent years, 
and applying a theoretical model of successful crisis management 
practices.


[Immigrants, Refugees & State].

This course examines the causes and consequences of forced migration, 
focusing in particular on displacement from conflict and human rights 
violations. It begins with the history of the concept of 'refuge' and 
then traces the evolution of the international regime for protecting 
and assisting refugees and displaced persons. The course then focuses 
on current examples of displacement in Africa, Latin America, the 
Middle East, Central and South Asia, and Europe.