// Politics, Governance, and Foreign Policy.

[Women & National Ident in Gulf].

This course will provide an introduction to the origins, histories 
and present natures of a range of different nationalisms and national 
identities in the contemporary world. It will begin by surveying 
rival theories concerning the origins of nationalism, and the nature 
of kinship, ethnic, religious and state identities in ancient and 
medieval history. It will then proceed to a detailed examination of 
particular national traditions and identities, and how they have 
changed over time. There will be a particular focus on nationalism in 
the most important contemporary states (the USA, China, Russia and 
India), and on nationalism in the countries of the Muslim world.

[Statecraft and Negotiation].

This course will look at American foreign policy through the lens of 
statecraft. Statecraft involves the orchestration of all the 
instruments of power and influence to protect against threats and to 
promote broad national interests. Key elements of statecraft include 
developing strategy, defining objectives and purposes, identifying 
the means available for pursuing that strategy, and then knowing how 
best to employ those means. If there is one instrument or policy tool 
that is central to nearly all forms of statecraft, it is negotiations. 
This course will thus take a closer look at the American approach to 
negotiations and how best to pursue them. It will also explore 
mediation as a policy tool for helping to settle or defuse local and 
sectarian conflicts and as a means of promoting a more favorable 
image of the U.S. internationally. In doing so, it will present a 
practitioner’s guide and set of specific rules for negotiations and 
mediation. As the students will see, these rules apply to every walk 
of life whether one is negotiating a business deal or buying a house. 
All negotiations need to start with having a clear objective and 
understanding what leverage one can bring to bear in the talks. To 
set a context for understanding statecraft and how it can best be 
employed, the initial part of the course will focus on our ethos and 
self-image. The next section of the course will be geared toward 
distilling the essential parts of statecraft by looking at several 
historical and contemporary cases in which different administrations 
identified important American interests and employed a variety of 
policy tools to try to achieve them: US policy in advance of the Suez 
war in 1956 and the June 1967 war; German unification in NATO in 
1990/91; Bosnia; the Persian Gulf War; and, the Iraq war of 2003 and 
its aftermath. The third part of the course examines policy 
instruments such as negotiations and mediation from a practitioner's 
standpoint. The concluding part of the course will discuss issues 
that are confronting the United States today and explore how an 
effective approach rooted in statecraft would shape American choices, 
policies, and the tools used to carry them out.

[Theory and Politics Citizenship].

In this “The Theory and Politics of Citizenship” class we will read 
and discuss the book “Citizenship: What everyone needs to know” by 
Peter Spiro. It is a key function of nation-states to define the 
precise character of citizenship. By granting citizenship 
nation-states are determining who gets in (and is eligible for 
privileges such as public services in the domains of health and 
education, amongst others, and has obligations such as military 
service) and who does not. We will discuss the history of, forms of, 
and different approaches to citizenship. There are a variety of 
concepts for granting citizenship, ranging from birthright citizenship 
like in the United States, commonly known as jus soli, to citizenship 
inherited through parents (or, as in most Arab countries, specifically 
by the father), commonly known as jus sanguinis. Over time, the 
exclusive nature of citizenship has eroded and there are a growing 
number of dual citizenship holders around the world, although not 
each country officially permits it. More and more countries have eased 
the path towards naturalization, but eligibility criteria differ. 
France, for example, requires residence for five continuous years, 
demonstrable competency in the language, and a knowledge of the 
culture. In Qatar, applicants need to have lived as a regular 
resident in the country for not less than twenty-five consecutive 
years and have good knowledge of the Arabic language.

[Public Diplomacy on the Edge]

This seminar explores new horizons in the field of public diplomacy, 
defined as government activities intended to understand, inform, and 
influence foreign publics. We will discuss the profound disruptions 
9/11, Benghazi, and COVID-19 have had on the daily work of public 
diplomacy practitioners, often prioritizing a “virtual first” 
approach for what has traditionally been a face-to-face practice. 
Course participants will review case studies from Africa, Asia, 
Latin America, and the Middle East; analyze the influence of social 
media, mis- and disinformation, and great power competition on 
current practice and the future of the field; and develop a strategic 
public diplomacy implementation plan. Students will learn practical 
skills related to developing and executing public affairs strategies 
and social media campaigns, writing for the media, and briefing 
senior officials. The instructor is a career State Department Foreign 
Service Officer who specializes in public diplomacy. She has worked 
on crisis operations and stabilization efforts in Washington and 
served in Brazil, Niger, Pakistan, and Somalia. She is currently a 
Rusk Fellow at the SFS Institute for the Study of Diplomacy.