// Religion.

[History of the Jewish People].

According to American writer, Pearl S. Buck, “If you want to 
understand today you have to search yesterday.” This course is a 
vibrant, comprehensive journey through history that uses a 
multi-disciplinary approach to bring to life the people, movements 
and events, that shaped the Jewish nation and left a lasting impact 
on the world at large. Using documentaries, films and 
autobiographical works of literature which communicate a people’s 
lived-experience, the course will comprehensively cover the history 
of the Jewish people, in detail from ancient to contemporary times. 
As a result, students will gain a thorough understanding of important 
movements and events which continue to be of worldwide importance 
today: the birth of Judaism, the creation of the Hebrew Bible, the 
ideology of Zionism, the experience of the Holocaust, the 
establishment of a Jewish state and the development of the Middle 
East conflict. Comprehensive coverage will make accessible these 
complex events and issues, endowing students with both thorough 
historical knowledge and the ability to navigate media coverage of 
these issues in the news today. No prior knowledge of Jewish history 
or culture is necessary. Two documentaries and four films will be 
screened as part of the course, which fulfills the HALC requirement. 

[Race, Religion, and Terrorism].

Going beyond America, this course takes a global approach to identity, 
race and religion. We do this through history, ideas, political 
movements, narratives, geopolitics, and assess the consequences for 
world order. We seek to understand race, religion and terror not as 
the past, but as a study of the patterns and causes of change. 
Students are then able to connect the dots between the past and 
present of major terrorist movements and/or conflicts. We evaluate 
future trajectories for the intersection of race, religion, and 
terrorism.

[Muslim Women & the West].

Muslim women often appear in Western imagination as oppressed, 
silent, and victimized. This course offers an alternate account of 
Muslim women by centering texts and aesthetics produced by them, 
along with ethnographic studies that give us a glimpse into their 
lives in the West. We encounter Muslim women through non-normative 
frames of agency, joy, community-building, and care. We observe the 
myriad ways in which they construct preferred futures against racist, 
capitalist, and heteronormative logics. A major thrust of the course 
is studying the lifeworlds of Shia Muslim women (a minority 
interpretive community within Islam).