// Science.

[Science Innov & Entreprenuers].

The United States is widely recognized as one of the most innovative 
and entrepreneurial countries in the world. The question that this 
course focuses on is "Why is that?" What is the policy framework that 
shapes the US innovation ecosystem, that is, a set of policies and 
cultural beliefs that provide a dynamic environment that encourages 
risk-taking and invention. Often in the US we focus on the role of 
the lone entrepreneur, forgetting that they are rarely alone and 
often draw from government policies, programs, and research to 
develop innovative products and processes. This course focuses on 
the intersection of science, technology and innovation policy – 
examining how our national innovation ecosystem works, with a 
particular focus on health, energy, high-tech products and 
manufacturing. A major emphasis of the course is the role of 
public-private-partnerships and the role federal and state 
government’s role in the innovation ecosystem. The underpinnings of 
the U.S. innovation system are examined as are the approaches of 
other nations to science and technology policy. There is a special 
focus on the steps needed to transition ideas from universities and 
laboratories to the market and the respective roles of public 
incentives that work in combination with angel investors and venture 
capital. The overall goal is to build a better understanding of the 
realities of the U.S. innovation system as well as the challenges it 
faces and the opportunities it provides. The class will conclude with 
student assessments of policies that could help fill gaps in global 
innovation and the manufacture of products to meet global needs in 
health, energy and security--all areas where innovation plays a key 
role.

[Examining Crises through Sci].

News headlines around the world are dominated by crises and disasters 
involving major threats to basic human needs for security, clean water 
and air, food, and health: Cape Town, South Africa is at risk of 
running out of fresh water, an Ebola outbreak rages in West Africa, 
and honeybees are suddenly disappearing. In these cases and others, 
an understanding science is required to understand how the crisis or 
disaster happened, what caused it, and how it might be resolved. 
Science plays a critical role in informing governments, communities, 
non-profits and individuals who need to make important decisions in 
response to such crises. In this course, we will examine these cases 
and others through the lens of science. By studying these cases, you 
will develop a better understanding of the role of science in 
policy-relevant issues and international affairs. You will also 
develop a stronger understanding of the process of science and how 
scientific understanding is developed, tested, and revised. Given the 
complex, interdisciplinary nature of these issues, we will focus on 
learning scientific principles and methods from a broad array of 
scientific fields including biology, chemistry, geosciences, and 
environmental sciences. The course will also highlight the importance 
of interdisciplinary science. This course is cross-listed with 
ENST180-01.