// Conflict, Peace, Security.

[Warfare / Lawfare].

Despite the United Nations’ claim to help “save succeeding generations 
from the scourge of war”, the world continues to suffer from genocide, 
military invasions, civil wars, and other forms of violent conflict. 
Debates continue to rage about how to fulfill ‘military necessity’ 
while protecting civilians from harm. When is it legal to resort to 
the use of force? How do laws regulate warfare to make it more 
‘humane’? Conversely, how is law used to justify war and to inflict 
suffering? This course will introduce students to the law and 
politics of initiating and conducting war, as well as reckoning with 
its consequences. It will also consider the practice of ‘lawfare’: 
the use of law as a weapon of conflict. Students will critically 
engage in discussions that explore the role of the use of force, 
also known as the Law of Armed Conflict (LOAC), or International 
Humanitarian Law, in shaping and regulating the global order. The 
course will cover the development of the laws of armed conflict, the 
key controversies that animate debates about the use of force, the 
role of the UN Security Council, humanitarian intervention, the law 
of occupation, information and cyberwarfare, among other topics. 
Using real-world examples such as the War on Terror, Iraq, Libya, 
Yemen, Afghanistan, Russia-Ukraine, and Israel-Palestine, the course 
will pay particular attention to critical analyses of lawfare/warfare 
in contemporary historical and interdisciplinary perspective. It will 
equip students with the language and the critical analytical tools 
necessary to understand the laws of war and their role in different 
contexts from around the world. It is recommended that students who 
enroll in this course will have taken the Public International Law 
course. It is not presumed that all students who take this course 
plan to go into law school. Rather, this course will be of particular 
interest to students who plan to pursue further studies and training 
in political science, international law, military and security studies, 
international relations, and conflict resolution.

[Water, Conflict, and Peace].

Water resources are in a state of crisis in many parts of the world. 
Despite such scarcity, water has been a catalyst for cooperation and 
environmental peace building among nations and other contending 
parties for millennia. In this course we will use regional case 
studies including farmer-herder confrontations in Africa, the 
weaponization of water, and a survey of existing water treaties and 
agreements, to better understand the dynamics of global hydro 
politics. Students will then be able to identify the contexts in 
which water is used and abused as an instrument of conflict and 
cooperation and to evaluate policy measures to achieve the most 
favorable outcomes.

[Nuclear Weapons & Int'l Security].

The purpose of the seminar is to explore the impact of nuclear 
weapons on international and regional security. The first part of 
the course deals with nuclear weapons design and development, the 
connections between nuclear power programs and nuclear weapons 
development, the causes and consequences of nuclear proliferation, 
and concepts of deterrence and stability. The second part addresses 
specific countries in their regional setting, Northeast and South 
Asia, the Middle-East, US-Russian security relations, and nuclear 
terrorism.


[Irregular War via Film].

In its inception, the “war film” and its creators have played 
prominent roles in, inter alia, setting political agendas, advocating 
policies, constructing images of the enemy other, defining civilization, 
manufacturing consent for or opposition to war, recreating and 
reproducing race and gender stereotypes. Most Americans, and likely 
citizens of other countries, will learn of wars not through formal 
studies of a conflict but through the cinematographic depiction of 
them. Unfortunately, despite the pervasive influence of film and other 
forms of popular culture, mainstream political science has generally 
considered these cultural artifacts unworthy of serious inquiry. This 
course departs from this intellectual position and contends that film 
can be an important medium through which we can understand 
international politics but, equally important, think critically about 
how films facilitate such understandings. This course begins with an 
overview of the essential practices and significant “languages” that 
film makers and writers use to create meaning through film. Learning 
the “grammar” of films will enable students to become more cognizant 
of how war and related concepts are portrayed in the popular culture 
they regularly consume and the understandings of those war such films 
facilitate. In this course, students will construct original arguments 
about how specific films create, reinforce or destabilize predominant 
views of war generally and specific wars in American society. To do so, 
we will closely study the ideas which are embedded in films as well as 
the techniques which film directors and writers use to convey a message 
or argument. After providing a foundation on how one reads a film, each 
of the subsequent twelve classes will examine a kind of conflict 
through the lens of at least two films that represent very different 
points of view. While the films are the most important “assignment,” 
I provide several readings intended to inform the student about the 
conflict depicted in the film. Topics covered in this course will 
include British and European colonial wars in Africa and Asia; the 
Vietnam War from the optics of French, American and Vietnamese citizens; 
the anti-Soviet war in Afghanistan; The First American Gulf War of 1991; 
the War on Terrorism; Peacekeeping and Peace-enforcing missions; the 
use of drones; intelligence failure; nuclear deterrence as well as a 
reflection upon race and gender in constructing heroism. At the end of 
this course, students will no longer be interested in watching films 
passively. They will find themselves talking back at the screen and 
with each other about the shenanigans or feats of genius in film 
whether it is the music that accompanies a scene, the choice of a 
landscape, or the kind of shot depicted. Because this course relies 
upon films that depict a variety of brutalities, it may not be for 
everyone.

[The Forensics of Mass Killings].

The Forensics of Mass Killings: Holocaust and Terrorist Crime Scenes. 
How do you conduct forensic investigations of genocide and mass 
killings on the ground? How do you examine the killing techniques of 
genocide and crimes committed in public or secret? How do 
perpetrators use propaganda for terrorism, genocide and follower 
recruitment? In the class, Fr. Patrick Desbois, a forensic 
anthropologist and author of "The Holocaust by Bullets" and "The 
Terrorist Factory" will answer these questions. Fr. Desbois will 
familiarize students with his recent investigation of crimes 
committed by ISIS in Iraq and Syria against the Yazidis and the 
crimes carried out by the Einsatzgruppen during the Holocaust. The 
class will compare ground investigation techniques, crime methodology 
and outcomes.